Chapter 1
1.1What is environmental science? 
 There was a time when, as an educated person, you would have been expected to converse confidently
about any intellectual or cultural topic. You would have read the latest novel, been familiar with the
work of the better-known poets, have had an opinion about the current state of art, musical composition
and both musical and theatrical performance. Should the subject of the conversation have changed,
you would have felt equally relaxed discussing philosophical ideas. These might well have included
the results of recent scientific research, for until quite recently the word ‘philosophy’ was used to
describe theories derived from the investigation of natural phenomena as well as those we associate
with philosophy today. The word ‘science’ is simply an anglicized version of the Latin scientia,
which means ‘knowledge’. In German, which borrowed much less from Latin, what we call ‘science’
is known as Wissenschaft, literally ‘knowledge’. ‘Science’ did not begin to be used in its restricted
modern sense until the middle of the last century.
As scientific discoveries accumulated it became increasingly difficult, and eventually impossible, for
any one person to keep fully abreast of developments across the entire field. A point came when there
was just too much information for a single brain to hold. Scientists themselves could no longer switch
back and forth between disciplines as they used to do. They became specialists and during this century
their specialisms have divided repeatedly. As a broadly educated person today, you may still have a
general grasp of the basic principles of most of the specialisms, but not of the detail in which the
research workers themselves are immersed. This is not your fault and you are not alone. Trapped inside
their own specialisms, most research scientists find it difficult to communicate with those engaged in
other research areas, even those bordering their own. No doubt you have heard the cliché defining a
specialist as someone who knows more and more about less and less. We are in the middle of what
journalists call an ‘information explosion’ and most of that information is being generated by scientists.
Clearly, the situation is unsatisfactory and there is a need to draw the specialisms into groups that will
provide overarching views of broad topics. It should be possible, for example, to fit the work of the
molecular biologist, extracting, cloning, and sequencing DNA, into some context that would relate it to
the work of the taxonomist, and the work of both to that of the biochemist. What these disciplines share
is their subject matter. All of them deal with living or once-living organisms. They deal with life and so
these, as well as a whole range of related specialisms, have come to be grouped together as the life
sciences. Similarly, geophysics, geochemistry, geomorphology, hydrology, mineralogy, pedology,oceanography, climatology, meteorology, and other disciplines are now grouped as the earth sciences,
because all of them deal with the physical and chemical nature of the planet Earth.
The third, and possibly broadest, of these groupings comprises the environmental sciences, sometimes
known simply as ‘environmental science’. It embraces all those disciplines which are concerned
with the physical, chemical, and biological surroundings in which organisms live. Obviously,
environmental science draws heavily on aspects of the life and earth sciences, but there is some
unavoidable overlap in all these groupings. Should palaeontology, for example, the study of past life,
be regarded as a life science or, because its material is fossilized and derived from rocks, an earth
science? It is both, but not necessarily at the same time. The palaeontologist may date a fossil and
determine the conditions under which it was fossilized as an earth scientist, and as a life scientist
reconstruct the organism as it appeared when it was alive and classify it. It is the direction of interest
that defines the grouping.
Any study of the Earth and the life it supports must deal with process and change. The earth and life
sciences also deal with process and change, but environmental science is especially concerned with
changes wrought by human activities, and their immediate and long-term implications for the welfare
of living organisms, including humans.
At this point, environmental science acquires political overtones and leads to controversy. If it suggests
that a particular activity is harmful, then modification of that activity may require national legislation
or an international treaty and, almost certainly, there will be an economic price that not everyone will
have to pay or pay equally. We may all be environmental winners in the long term, but in the short term
there will be financial losers and, not surprisingly, they will complain.

1.2Environmental interactions, cycles, and systems 
 Inquisitive children sometimes ask whether the air they breathe was once breathed by a dinosaur. It
may have been. The oxygen that provides the energy to power your body has been used many times
by many different organisms, and the carbon, hydrogen, and other elements from which your body is
made have passed through many other bodies during the almost four billion years that life has existed
on our planet. All the materials found at the surface of the Earth, from the deepest ocean trenches to
the top of the atmosphere, are engaged in cycles that move them from place to place. Even the solid
rock beneath your feet moves, as mountains erode, sedimentary rocks are subducted into the Earth’s
mantle, and volcanic activity releases new igneous rock. There is nothing new or original in the idea
of recycling!
The cycles proceed at widely differing rates and rates that vary from one part of the cycle to another.
Cycling rates are usually measured as the time a molecule or particle remains in a particular part of
the cycle. This is called its ‘residence time’ or ‘removal time’. On average, a dust or smoke particle
in the lower atmosphere (the troposphere) remains airborne for a matter of a few weeks at most
before rain washes it to the surface, and a water molecule remains in the air for around 9 or 10 days.
Material reaching the upper atmosphere (the stratosphere) resides there for much longer, sometimes
for several years, and water that drains from the surface into ground water may remain there for up
to 400 years, depending on the location.Water that sinks to the bottom of the deep oceans eventually returns to the surface, but this takes very
much longer than the removal of water molecules from the air. In the Pacific Ocean, for example, it
takes 1000 to 1600 years for deep water to return to the surface and in the Atlantic and Indian Oceans
it takes around 500 to 800 years (MARSHALL, 1979). This is relevant to concerns about the
consequences of disposing industrial and low-level radioactive waste by sealing it in containers and
dumping them in the deep oceans.
Those monitoring the movement of materials through the environment often make use of labelling,
different labels being appropriate for different circumstances. In water, chemically inert dyes are
often used. Certain chemicals will bond to particular substances. When samples are recovered, analysis
reveals the presence or absence of the chemical label. Radioisotopes are also used. These consist of
atoms chemically identical to all other atoms of the same element, but with a different mass, because
of a difference in the number of neutrons in the atomic nucleus. Neutrons carry no charge and so take
no part in chemical reactions, the chemical characteristics of an element being determined by the
number of protons, with a positive charge, in its atomic nucleus.
You can work out the atmospheric residence time of solid particles by releasing particles labelled
chemically or with radioisotopes and counting the time it takes for them to be washed back to the
ground, although the resulting values are very approximate. Factory smoke belching forth on a rainy
day may reach the ground within an hour or even less; the exhaust gases from an aircraft flying at
high altitude will take much longer, because they are further from the ground to start with and in
much drier air. It is worth remarking, however, that most of the gases and particles which pollute the
air and can be harmful to health have very short atmospheric residence times. Sulphur dioxide, for
example, which is corrosive and contributes to acid rain, is unlikely to remain in the air for longer
than one month and may be washed to the surface within one minute of being released. The atmospheric
residence time for water molecules is calculated from the rate at which surface water evaporates and
returns as precipitation.
The deep oceans are much less accessible than the atmosphere, but water carries a natural label in
the form of carbon-14(14C). This forms in the atmosphere through the bombardment of nitrogen (14N) by cosmic radiation, but it is unstable and decays to the commoner 12C at a steady rate. While
water is exposed to the air, both 12C and 14C dissolve into it, but once isolated from the air the
decay of 14C means that the ratio of the two changes, 12C increasing at the expense of 14C. It is
assumed that 14C forms in the air at a constant rate, so the ratio of 12C to 14C is always the same and
certain assumptions are made about the rate at which atmospheric carbon dioxide dissolves into
sea water and the rate at which water rising from the depths mixes with surface water. Whether or
not the initial assumptions are true, the older water is the less 14C it will contain, and if the
assumptions are true the age of the water can be calculated from its 14C content in much the same
way as organic materials are 14C-dated.
Carbon, oxygen, and sulphur are among the elements living organisms use and they are being cycled
constantly through air, water, and living cells. The other elements required as nutrients are also
engaged in similar biogeochemical cycles. Taken together, all these cycles can be regarded as
components of a very complex system functioning on a global scale. Used in this sense, the concept
of a ‘system’ is derived from information theory and describes a set of components which interact to
form a coherent, and often self-regulating, whole. Your body can be considered as a system in which
each organ performs a particular function and the operation of all the organs is coordinated so that
you exist as an individual who is more than the sum of the organs from which your body is made.

1.3Ecology and environmentalism
 Our concern over the condition of the natural environment has led to the introduction of a new concept,
of ‘environmental quality’, which can be measured against defined parameters. To give one example, if
the air contains more than 0.1 parts per million (ppm) of nitrogen dioxide (NO2) or sulphur dioxide (SO2) persons with respiratory complaints may experience breathing difficulties, and if it contains
more than about 2.5 ppm of NO2 or 5.0 ppm of SO2 healthy persons may also be affected (KUPCHELLA
AND HYLAND, 1986). These are quantities that can be monitored, and there are many more. It is also
possible, though much more difficult, to determine the quality of a natural habitat in terms of the
species it supports and to measure any deterioration as the loss of species.
These are matters that can be evaluated scientifically, in so far as they can be measured, but not
everything can be measured so easily. We know, for example, that in many parts of the tropics
primary forests are being cleared, but although satellites monitor the affected areas it is difficult to
form accurate estimates of the rate at which clearance is proceeding, mainly because different people
classify forests in different ways and draw different boundaries to them. The United Nations
Environment Programme (UNEP) has pointed out that between 1923 and 1985 there were at least 23
separate estimates of the total area of closed forest in the world, ranging from 23.9 to 60.5 million
km2
. The estimate UNEP prefers suggests that in pre-agricultural times there was a total of 12.77
million km2
 of tropical closed forest and that by 1970 this had been reduced by 0.48 per cent, to
12.29 million km2
, and that the total area of forests of all kinds declined by 7.01 per cent, from 46.28
to 39.27 million km2
, over the same period (TOLBA ET AL., 1992). Edward O.Wilson, on the other
hand, has written that in 1989 the total area of rain forests was decreasing by 1.8 per cent a year
(WILSON, 1992). (A rain forest is one in which the annual rainfall exceeds 2540 mm; most occur in
the tropics, but there are also temperate rain forests.) Similar differences occur in estimates of the
extent of land degradation through erosion and the spread of deserts (called ‘desertification’). Before
we can devise appropriate responses to these examples of environmental deterioration we have to
find some way of reconciling the varying estimates of their extent. After all, it is impossible to
address a problem unless we can agree on its extent.
Even when quantities can be measured with reasonable precision controversy may attend
interpretations of the measurements. We can know the concentration of each substance present in air,
water, soil, or food in a particular place at a particular time. If certain of those substances are not
ordinarily present and could be harmful to living organisms we can call them ‘pollutants’, and if they
have been introduced as a consequence of human activities, rather than as a result of a natural
process such as volcanism, we can seek to prevent further introduction of them in the future. This
may seem simple enough, but remember that someone has to pay for the measurement: workers need
wages, and equipment and materials must be bought. Reducing pollution is usually inconvenient and
costly, so before taking action, again we need to determine the seriousness of the problem. The mere
presence of a pollutant does not imply harm, even when the pollutant is known to be toxic. Injury
will occur only if susceptible organisms are exposed to more than a threshold dose, and where large
numbers of very different species of plants, animals, and microorganisms are present this threshold
is not easily calculated.Nor is it easy to calculate thresholds for human exposure, because only large populations can be
used for the epidemiological studies that will demonstrate effects, and small changes cannot always
be separated statistically from natural fluctuations. (Epidemiology is the study of the incidence,
distribution, and control of illness in a human population.) It has been estimated that over several
decades the 1986 accident at the Chernobyl nuclear reactor may lead to a 0.03 per cent increase in
radiation-induced cancer deaths in the former Soviet Union and a 0.01 per cent increase in the world
as a whole, increases that will not be detectable against the natural variations in the incidence of
cancer from year to year (ALLABY, 1995).
Where there is doubt, prudence may suggest we set thresholds very low, and in practice this is what
happens. With certain pesticide residues in food, for example, the EU operates a standard of ‘surrogate
zero’ by setting limits lower than the minimum quantity that can be detected.Environmental science has a long history and concern with the condition of the environment has
been expressed at intervals over many centuries, but the modern environmental movement emerged
during the 1960s, first in the United States and Britain. The publication of Silent Spring in 1962 in
the United States and 1963 in Britain provided a powerful stimulus to popular environmental concern
and may have marked the origin of the modern movement. This was the book in which Rachel
Carson mounted a strong attack on the way agricultural insecticides were being used in North America.
The dire consequences of which she warned were essentially ecological: she maintained that the
indiscriminate poisoning of insects by non-selective compounds was capable of disrupting food
chains, the sequences of animals feeding on one another as, for example, insects ? blackbirds ?
sparrowhawks. The ‘silent spring’ of her title referred to the absence of birds, killed by poisons
accumulated through feeding on poisoned insects, but the ‘fable’ with which the book begins also
describes the deaths of farm livestock and humans. The catastrophe was ecological and so the word
‘ecology’ acquired a political connotation. A magazine devoted to environmental campaigning,
founded in 1970, was (and still is) called The Ecologist.

1.4History of environmental science
 By the time their civilization reached its peak in the Fifth Dynasty (after about 2480 BC) the ancient
Egyptians seem to have become happy people. According to accounts described by the late Joseph
Campbell (CAMPBELL, 1962), a leading authority on the ways people have seen themselves and
the world around them, they had a joyful, outward-looking view of the world around them. True,
they were somewhat preoccupied with the after-life, but that was seen pretty much as a continuation
of their present lives and was celebrated in some of the most beautiful art and magnificent architecture
the world has ever seen. Their pharaoh was described as ‘good’ rather than ‘great’ and the land he
ruled was paradise, mythologically and to some extent literally. Life was very predictable and secure.
Each year, the appearance of Sirius, the star of Isis, on the horizon at dawn heralded the flooding of
the Nile. The reliable flood brought water and silt to enrich the cultivated land and guarantee the
bountiful harvest that would follow. No doubt the work was hard, as it always is, but there was ample
time for festivals and celebrations.
The Egyptians did not develop what we would recognize as science. Their view of the world was
mythological and magical. Nevertheless, they did have a view of the world and a practical knowledge
of those aspects of it that mattered to them. They knew much about agriculture, plants and animals,water and how to use it effectively, they knew how to make bricks and were expert in the use of
stone. People have always constructed mental frameworks to describe and explain the world around
them. Not all were as positive as that of the Egyptians, but humans have an inherent need to understand,
to make sense of their surroundings and locate themselves in them.
If we are to understand the world about us we must discover an order underlying phenomena or,
failing that, impose one. Only then can we categorize things and so bring coherence to what
would otherwise be chaotic. Most early attempts at classification were based on a mythological
world-view. The anthropologist Mary Douglas has suggested, for example, that the biblical
distinction between ‘clean’ and ‘unclean’ animals arose because Hebrew priests believed that
sheep and goats, both ruminant animals with cloven hoofs, fitted into what they supposed to be
the divine scheme, but pigs did not, because they have cloven hoofs but are not ruminants
(BOWLER, 1992, pp. 11–12).
Science, in those days called ‘philosophy’ (‘love of wisdom’), began with Thales (c. 640–546
BC) , who lived in the Greek trading town of Miletus on the Aegean coast of what is now
Turkey. He and his followers became known as the Ionian or Milesian school and the radical
idea they introduced was that phenomena could be discussed rationally. That is to say, they
suggested the mythical accounts of creation could be tested and rational explanations proposed
for the order underlying the constant change we see everywhere. It is this critical attitude,
allowing all ideas to be challenged by rational argument based on evidence and weaker theories
to be replaced by stronger ones, which distinguishes science from non-science and pseudoscience.
It originated only once; other civilizations developed considerable technological skills, but it
was only among the Greeks living on the shores of Asia Minor that the modern concept of a
‘scientific approach’ emerged. All our science is descended from that beginning, and it began
with environmental science. The Greek development reached its peak with the Academy, founded
by Plato (429–347 BC), a student of Socrates, and the Lyceum, founded by Plato’s disciple
Aristotle (384–322 BC). Aristotle wrote extensively on natural history. His studies of more than
500 species of animals included accurate descriptions, clearly based on personal observation,
that were not confirmed until many centuries later. He recorded, for example, the reproduction
of dogfish and the mating of squid and octopus. He also wrote about the weather in a book
called Meteorologica (‘discourse on atmospheric phenomena’), from which we derive our word
‘meteorology’.
Roman thinkers continued the Greek tradition, Pliny the Elder (c. AD 23–79) being the best-known
Roman naturalist. His Natural History, covering what are now recognized as botany, zoology,
agriculture, geography, geology, and a range of other topics, was based on fact, although he mingled
records of his own observations with myths and fantastic travellers’ tales. Muslim scholars translated
the Greek and Latin texts into Arabic, but it was not until the thirteenth century that they became
generally available in Europe, as Latin translations from the Arabic.


Chapter 2
2.1Formation and structure of the Earth
 Among the nine planets in the solar system, Earth is the only one which is known to support life. All
the materials we use are taken from the Earth and it supplies us with everything we eat and drink. It
receives energy from the Sun, which drives its climates and biological systems, but materially it is
self-contained, apart from the dust particles and occasional meteorites that reach it from space
(ADAMS, 1977, pp. 35–36). These may amount to 10000 tonnes a year, but most are vaporized by
the heat of friction as they enter the upper atmosphere and we see them as ‘shooting stars’. At the
most fundamental level, the Earth is our environment.
The oldest rocks, found on the Moon, are about 4.6 billion years old and this is generally accepted to
be the approximate age of the Earth and the solar system generally. There are several rival theories
describing the process by which the solar system may have formed.1
 The most widely accepted
theory, first proposed in 1644 by René Descartes (1596–1650), proposes that the system formed
from the condensation of a cloud of gas and dust, called the ‘primitive solar nebula’ (PSN). It is now
thought this cloud may have been perturbed by material from a supernova explosion. Fusion processes
within stars convert hydrogen to helium and in larger stars go on to form all the heavier elements up
to iron. Elements heavier than iron can be produced only under the extreme conditions of the supernova
explosion of a very massive star, and the presence of such elements (including zinc, gold, mercury,
and uranium) on Earth indicates a supernova source.
As the cloud condensed, its mass was greatest near the centre. This concentration of matter comprised the
Sun, the planets forming from the remaining material in a disc surrounding the star, and the whole system rotated. The inner planets formed by accretion. Small particles moved close to one another, were drawn
together by their mutual gravitational attraction, and as their masses increased they gathered more particles
and continued to grow. At some point it is believed that a collision between the proto-Earth and a very
large body disrupted the planet, the material re-forming as two bodies rather than one: the Earth-Moon
system. This explains why the Earth and Moon are considered to be of the same age and, therefore, why
lunar rocks 4.6 billion years old are held to be of about the age of the Earth and Moon.
The material of Earth became arranged in discrete layers, like the skins of an onion. If accretion was
a slow process compared to the rate at which the PSN cooled, the densest material may have arrived
first, followed by progressively less dense material, in which case the layered structure has existed
from the start and would not have been altered by melting due to the gravitational energy released as
heat by successive impacts. This model is called ‘heterogeneous accretion’. If material arrived quickly
in relation to the rate of PSN cooling, then it would have comprised the whole range of densities. As
the planet cooled from the subsequent melting, denser material would have gravitated to the centre
and progressively less dense material settled in layers above it. This model is called ‘homogeneous
accretion’ (ALLABY AND ALLABY, 1999).
As it exists today, the Earth has a mean radius of 6371 km, equatorial circumference of 40077 km,
polar circumference of 40009 km, total mass of 5976×1024g, and mean density of 5.517 g. cm-3. Of
There is much more land in the northern hemisphere than in the southern, but at the poles the positions
are reversed: Antarctica is a large continent, but there is little land within the Arctic Circle.

2.2The formation of rocks, minerals, and geologic structures
 Volcanoes create environments. This was demonstrated very dramatically, and shown on televi-sion,
in 1963, when a new submarine volcano called Surtsey (volcano.und.nodak.edu/vwdocs/volc_images/
europe_west_asia/surtsey.html) erupted to the south of Iceland. The eruption was extremely violent,
because sea water entered the open volcanic vent, and steam, gas, pieces of rock, and ash were
hurled many kilometres into the air. Since then eruptions of this type have been called ‘Surtseyan’.
The lava cone was high enough to rise above the surface, where it formed what is now the island of Surtsey. As it cooled, sea birds began to settle on it.3
 They carried plant seeds and slowly plants and
animals began to colonize the new land.
Even the damage caused by destructive eruptions is repaired, although this can take a long time. The
1883 eruption of Krakatau, in the Sunda Strait between Java and Sumatra, Indonesia, destroyed
almost every living thing on Krakatau itself and on two adjacent islands. Three years later the lava
was covered in places by a thin layer of cyanobacteria, and a few mosses, ferns, and about 15 species
of flowering plants, including four grasses, had established themselves. By 1906 there was some
woodland, which is now thick forest. The only animal found in 1884 was a spider, but by 1889 there
were many arthropods and some lizards. In 1908, 202 species of animals were living on Krakatau
and 29 on one of the islands nearby, although bats were the only mammals. Rats were apparently
introduced in 1918. Species continued to arrive and 1100 were recorded in 1933 (KENDEIGH,
1974, pp. 24–25).
Rock that forms from the cooling and crystallization of molten magma is called ‘igneous’, from the
Latin igneus, ‘of fire’, and all rock is either igneous or derived from igneous rock. This must be so,
since the molten material in the mantle is the only source for entirely new surface rock. If the magma
reached the surface before cooling the rock is known as ‘extrusive’; if it cooled beneath the surface
surrounded by older rock into which it had been forced, it is said to be ‘intrusive’. Intrusive rock may
be exposed later as a result of weathering. It is not only igneous rocks that can form intrusions. Rock
salt (NaCl) can accumulate in large amounts beneath much denser rocks and rise through them very
slowly to form a salt dome. Salt domes are deliberately sought by geologists prospecting for oil but
occasionally they can break through the surface. When this happens the salt may flow downhill like
a glacier.
The character of the rock depends first on its chemical composition. If it is rich in compounds of iron
and magnesium it will be dark (melanocratic); if it is rich in silica, as quartz and feldspars, it will be
light in colour (leucocratic). Rock between the two extremes is called ‘mesocratic’. The rock comprises
minerals, each with a particular chemical composition, and minerals crys-tallize as they cool. Whole
rock is quarried for building and other uses; many minerals are mined for the chemical substances
they contain, especially metals, and some are valued as gemstones. Crystallization proceeds as atoms
bond to particular sites on the surface of a seed crystal, forming a three-dimensional lattice. It can
occur only where atoms have freedom to move and so the more slowly a molten rock cools the larger
the crystals it is likely to contain. The crystal size gives the rock a grain structure, which also contributes
to its overall character. The type of rock is also determined by the circumstances of its formation.
Lava that flows as sheets across the land surface or sea bed often forms basalt, a dark, fine-grained,
hard rock. Basalt covers about 70 per cent of the Earth’s upper crust, making it the commonest of all
rocks; most of the ocean floor is of basalt overlain by sediments and on land it produces vast plateaux,
such as the Deccan Traps in India. Intrusive igneous rocks are usually of the light-coloured granite
type. Beyond this, however, the identification and classification of igneous rocks are rather
complicated.

2.3Weathering
 No sooner has a rock formed than it becomes vulnerable to attack by weathering. The word
‘weathering’ is slightly misleading. We associate it with wind, water, freezing, and thawing. These
are important agents of weathering, but they are not the only ones. Weathering can be chemical as
well as physical and it often begins below ground, completely isolated from the weather.
Beneath the surface, natural pores and fissures in rocks are penetrated by air, containing oxygen and
carbon dioxide, and by water into which a wide variety of compounds have dissolved to make an
acid solution. Depending on their chemical composition, rock minerals may dissolve or be affected
by oxidation, hydration, or hydrolysis (HOLMES, 1965, pp. 393–400). Oxidation is a reaction in
which atoms bond with oxygen or lose electrons (and other atoms gain them, and are said to be
‘reduced’). Hydration is the bonding of water to another molecule to produce a hydrated compound;
for example, the mineral gypsum (CaSO4
.2H2
O) results from the hydration of anhy-drite (CaSO4
).
Hydrolysis (lysis, from the Greek lusis, ‘loosening’) is a reaction in which some parts of a molecule
react with hydrogen ions and other parts with hydroxyl (OH) ions, both derived from water, and this
splits the molecule into two or more parts.
The result of chemical weathering can be seen in the limestone pavements found in several parts of
England, Wales, and Ireland.8
 South Devon, England, is famous for its red sandstones, well exposed
in the coastal cliffs of the Torbay area. These date from the Devonian Period, some 400 million years ago, when what is now Devon was a hot, arid desert. The desert sand contained some iron, which
was oxidized to its insoluble red oxide, giving the sandstone its present colour. Iron oxidizes readily and this form of weathering has produced hematite (Fe2O3) , one of the most
important iron ore minerals, some of which occurs in banded ironstone formations, 2–3 billion years
old, composed of alternating bands of hematite and chert (SiO2). Iron and other metals can also be
concentrated by hydrothermal, or metasomatic, processes. Near mid-ocean ridges, where new basalt
is being erupted on to the sea bed, iron, manganese, and some other metals tend to separate from the
molten rock and are then oxidized and precipitated, where particles grow to form nodules, sometimes
called ‘manganese nodules’ because this is often the most abundant metal in them. Vast fields of
nodules, containing zinc, lead, copper, nickel, cobalt, silver, gold, and other metals as well as
manganese and iron, have been found on the floor of all the oceans (KEMPE, 1981). A few years ago
serious consideration was given to the possibility of dredging for them, but at present metals can be
obtained more cheaply by conventional mining on land.

2.4The evolution of landforms
 The weathering of exposed rocks and the erosion and transport of loose particles create the landscapes
we see and change them constantly. Change is usually slow, but not always. The 1952 Lynmouth
flood was very sudden (see box), but not far away there are landscapes which record conditions long
ago. During the most recent glaciation the ice sheets did not extend as far south as Devon, but on the
high granite batholith of Dartmoor the climate was severe, with permanently frozen ground
(permafrost), and to this day parts of Dartmoor are periglacial landscapes. Rock masses were shattered
by the repeated freezing and thawing of water that penetrated crevices. In winter the water expanded as it froze, widening the crevices, and in summer the water shrank as
it melted, releasing flakes of rock and also large boulders. For those few weeks in summer when the
weather was warm enough to thaw the surface layers of the permafrost, turning soil locked solid by
ice into wet mud, the mud, together with large boulders embedded in it, slid downhill, only to be
brought to a halt when the temperature dropped and the mud froze again. Today, although there is no
permafrost, the scattering of boulders around the tors remains as a record of the climate more than
10000 years ago. Similar periglacial processes acting on the weak, jointed chalk of southern England
caused slopes to retreat through the loss of material from their faces and produced large deposits of
the angular debris comprising fragments of varying sizes called ‘coombe rock’ or sometimes ‘head’
(other definitions confine ‘head’ to deposits other than chalk). There are similar periglacial relics in
North America and elsewhere in Europe.Present permafrost regions occur in latitudes much higher than Britain. In Canada and Alaska within
the Arctic Circle in places the permafrost is 400 m thick and in parts of Siberia it is 700 m thick. In
Resolute Bay, in the Canadian Arctic, it extends to a depth of about 1000 m. Overall, nearly 20 per
cent of the land area within the Arctic Circle is permafrost, and has remained in this state since the
retreat of the ice sheets that once covered it.
Ice sheets are major sculptors of landscapes. As they move, they scour away all soil and other loose
material, pushing it ahead and to the sides of them, where it may form moraines. They smooth
angular rocks and the weight of the ice depresses the ground beneath. During a major glaciation ice
sheets may grow to a thickness of more than 2500 m and depress the underlying surface by 600 m,
which may take it to below sea level. As the ice retreats, the surface rises again, but it is a slow
process, at least as measured on a human scale. Northern Canada, where shore-lines rose several
tens of metres in less than 1000 years, and Scandinavia are still rising to compensate for the loss of
their ice sheets around 10000 years ago; in Scandinavia the surface was depressed by about 1000 m
and has subsequently risen by 520 m. This ‘glacioisostasy’ demonstrates the slight flexibility of the
Earth’s crust.
Because there is a lag between the disappearance of the ice sheets and the recovery of the original
surface elevation, bowls may remain where the ice was thickest. Depending on their location, these
may be flooded by the sea or fill with fresh water. The North American Great Lakes and the Baltic
Sea were made in this way. On a much smaller scale, so were the lakes of the English Lake District.

2.5Coasts, estuaries, sea levels
 It seems natural to think of an estuary in terms of the river flowing into it, to see it as the end of the
river, with a boundary somewhere offshore where the river meets and merges with the sea. Stand on
a headland overlooking an estuary and this is how it looks, but the picture is misleading. An estuary
is more accurately described as an arm of the sea that extends inland and into which a river flows. An
estuary is dominated by the sea rather than its river, and many estuaries are in fact ‘rias’, or ‘drowned
river valleys’, old river valleys which were flooded at some time in the past when the sea level rose.
The estuaries of south-west England are good examples of rias. In several cases, such as the Camel
in north Cornwall, before the marine transgression that began about 10300 years ago the sea was 36
m below its present level (the sea is still rising at about 25 cm per century), and gently undulating
land, with hills formed from igneous intrusions through Devonian slate which survive now as offshore
islands, extended up to 5 km from the present coast. This land was blanketed with mixed deciduous
forest. Remnants of the forest have been found on the sea bed at several points along the coast and its
botanical and faunal composition determined (JOHNSON AND DAVID, 1982).
Sea levels change and at various times in the past they have been both higher and lower than they are
today, and they are changing still. During glacial periods (ice ages), sea levels fall, because the
volume of the oceans decreases as water evaporated from them accumulates in ice sheets. As the
weight of ice depresses the land beneath it sea levels rise; as the ice sheets melt they also rise; and as
land depressed by the weight of ice rises again when the ice has melted they fall. There is clear
evidence in many places that sea levels were much lower at some time in the past. Raised beaches
can be found that are several metres above the present high-tide level. These are areas of approximately
level ground, nowadays usually vegetated, containing large numbers of shells of marine organisms.
They can have been produced only by the movement of waves and tides over them, at a time when
they formed the shore; they are ancient beaches now some distance from the sea.
The sea bed at the mouth of the Camel estuary is mainly sandy, with sand bars, and there are many
sandy beaches along the adjacent coast. Sand consists primarily of quartz grains weathered and eroded
from igneous rocks inland and transported by the river. They are deposited at the mouth of the estuary,
then transported further by tides and sea currents. As they move they become mixed with varying
amounts of sea shells, most of which are crushed to tiny fragments through being battered by harder As the fresh water is forced to rise, it loses energy, and the quantity of material a river can transport,
known as its ‘traction load’ or ‘bed load’, is directly proportional to the energy with which it flows.
This depends in turn on such factors as the potential gravitational energy causing the water to flow
(essentially the height of the river source above sea level), the gradient of the channel, and the
amount of friction caused by contact with the banks and bed (SMALL, 1970, pp. 34–41). As the
river water rises and loses energy, the sand grains sink, falling through the underlying salt water and
on to the bed. Figure 2.8 shows what happens and how over time the deposition of sand can lead to
the formation of a bar at the estuary mouth.
Sand does not remain static on the sea bed and material for the growth of a bar is also provided by
sand being carried landward or along the shore by tides and sea currents. The sea water also loses
energy as it pushes against the fresh water, and the sand it carries is again deposited.
Sand grains are much larger and heavier than the particles of silt rivers also carry. Silt particles are
2–60 micrometres (µm) in diameter, sand grains 60–2000 µm (in the British standard classification;
in the widely used Udden-Wentworth classification they are 4–62.5 µm and 62.5–2000 µm
respectively). Ordinarily, large particles would be expected to settle first and small ones later, but in
an estuary the opposite occurs. Mudbanks, composed of silt, still smaller clay particles and, mixed
with them, organic molecules from the decomposition of the waste products and dead bodies of
biological organisms, form inland of the sand banks. Flocculation is the process responsible for this
phenomenon. Many of the very small particles carry an electrical charge owing to the presence of
magnesium (Mg2+) ions, which bond to them and attract more silt particles, so the material forms
clumps larger and heavier than sand grains, and these settle. The organic material mixed with them
provides rich sustenance for bacteria and, closer to the surface, burrowing invertebrate animals,
which provide food for wading birds. The environment is harsh because the salinity of the water
varies widely, so although only a restricted number of species can regulate their osmosis well enough
to survive in the mud, those which succeed do so in vast numbers. Estuarine waters may also be
enriched by a ‘nutrient trap’, where the current pattern causes dissolved plant nutrients to be retained
 
2.6Energy from the Sun
 Tides are driven by gravitational energy and plate tectonics by the heat generated by the radioactive
decay of elements in the Earth’s mantle, but the energy driving the atmosphere, oceans, and living
organisms is supplied by the Sun. To a limited extent this energy can also be harnessed directly to
perform useful work for humans. Solar heat can be used directly to warm buildings and water,
desalinate water, and cook food. Sunlight can be converted into electricity. Electrical power can also
be generated from wind and sea waves and, because the atmospheric circulation responsible for
wind and wind-driven waves is driven by solar heat, these are also forms of solar energy.
The outer layer of the Sun, which is what we see and the region from which the Sun radiates, is at a
temperature of about 6000 K and it radiates energy at 73.5×106
 W from every square metre of its
visible surface (the photosphere; being entirely gaseous, the Sun has no solid surface). The figure
can be calculated because the Sun behaves as a ‘black body’. This is a body that absorbs all the
energy falling on it and radiates energy at the maximum rate possible; the rate is calculated by using
Stefan’s law9
 and is proportional to the absolute temperature raised to the fourth power.
The Sun radiates in all directions and the Earth, being a very small target at a distance of 150 million
km, intercepts 0.0005 per cent of the total. At the top of the Earth’s atmosphere this amounts to about
1360 W m-2, a value known as the ‘solar constant’.
Solar output is not as constant as this name suggests. Between 1981 and 1984, it decreased by 0.07
per cent (HIDORE AND OLIVER, 1993, p. 166). This is a small deviation, but a decrease of about
0.1 per cent sustained over a decade would be sufficient to produce major climatic effects and a 5 per
cent decrease might trigger a major glaciation. Cyclical variations in the Earth’s rotation and orbit
also alter the solar constant. These are believed to be the major cause of large-scale climatic change,
and variations in solar output, marked by changes in sunspot activity, are linked to less dramatic
changes, such as the Little Ice Age, a period when average temperatures were lower than at present
which lasted from about 1450 to 1880. Some scientists believe that the recent climatic warming and
rise in atmospheric carbon dioxide concentration are both wholly due to the marked increase in
energy output of the Sun since about 1966 (CALDER, 1999).Radiant heat and light are both forms of electromagnetic radiation, varying only in their wavelengths,
and the Sun radiates across the whole electromagnetic spectrum. According to Wien’s law10, the
wavelength at which a body radiates most intensely is inversely proportional to its temperature, so
the hotter the body the shorter the wavelength at which it radiates most intensely. This is not
surprising, because electromagnetic radiation travels only at the speed of light (beyond the Earth’s
atmosphere, in space, about 300000 km s-1) and the only way its energy can increase is by reducing
the wavelength. Very short-wave (high-energy) gamma (10-4–10-8 µm) and X (10-3–10-5 µm) solar
radiation is absorbed in the upper atmosphere and none reaches the surface. Radiation with a
wavelength between 0.2 and 0.4 µm is called ‘ultraviolet’ (UV); at wavelengths below 0.29 µm,
most UV is absorbed by stratospheric oxygen (O2
and 0.7 µm are what we see as visible light, with violet at the short-wave end of the spectrum and
red at the long-wave end. These are the wavelengths at which the Sun radiates most intensely, with
an intensity peak at around 0.5 µm in the green part of the spectrum. It is the part of the spectrum
to which our eyes are sensitive, for the obvious reason that the most intense radiation is also the
most useful, although some animals have eyes receptive to slightly shorter or longer wavelengths.
Beyond the red end of the visible spectrum lie the infra-red wavelengths (0.7 µm to 1 mm) and,
with increasing wavelengths, microwaves and radio waves, the longest of which have wavelengths
up to about 100 km.
The atmosphere is transparent to wavelengths longer than 0.29 µm, although water vapour absorbs
energy in several narrow bands between 0.9 and 2.1 µm (BARRY AND CHORLEY, 1982, pp. 10
and 15). When radiant energy, as light or heat, strikes the surface of land or water its energy is
absorbed and the surface is warmed. The Earth is not warmed evenly and Figure 2.10 shows how the
energy is distributed. The equator faces the Sun, which is always directly overhead at noon.
Consequently, its radiation is most intense at the equator. With increasing distance from the equator,
the Sun is lower in the sky at all seasons and its radiation covers a larger area less intensely.
Although latitude is obviously important, and places in high latitudes tend to receive less solar
energy than those in low latitudes, cloudiness modifies the general distribution quite strongly. The
equatorial region does not receive the most intense insolation, because for much of the time clouds
shade the surface, reflecting incoming sunlight. Tropical and subtropical deserts, where skies are
mainly clear, receive 50 to 100 per cent more insolation than the equator and the dry interiors of
North America and Eurasia are much sunnier than maritime regions.

2.7Albedo and heat capacity
 Walk in a snow-covered landscape on a sunny day and you may feel more comfortable if you wear
dark glasses. Indeed, you may be well advised to wear dark glasses, because the light may be bright
enough to hurt your eyes. Once the snow has melted, and the ground is carpeted with plants, you will
have less need of dark glasses. The light will not be so bright.
We can see objects because of the light reflected from them. Their colour is determined by the
wavelengths of the light they reflect and their brightness by the amount. Freshly fallen snow
reflects 80–90 per cent of the light falling on it, grass 18–25 per cent, and this is why you need
dark glasses when crossing snow: it may be almost as bright as the Sun itself. Grass, on the other
hand, is much duller.
The proportion of light reflected by a surface is called the ‘reflection coefficient’, or more usually
‘albedo’ of that surface. It can be measured and is usually expressed as a fraction or a percentage. As
Table 2.1 shows, albedo varies widely from one surface to another.Aerosols are released into the air by volcanoes, as salt crystals formed when droplets of sea spray
evaporate, from forest fires, and as tiny soil particles raised by the wind. They are also produced by
a range of human activities, especially the burning of fuels. It is difficult to separate natural sources
from those linked directly to human activities, and both vary from season to season and year to year
but, on average, agriculture and industry account for about one-third of the particulate matter in the
air. Forest clearance and the overgrazing of marginal land in semi-arid regions, for example, leads to
large injections of small particles as wind-blown soil.
From time to time people suggest altering albedos to trigger climatic change. Particles injected into
the upper troposphere might increase the formation of cirriform cloud, for example, and particles
injected into the stratosphere might increase planetary albedo for several years. In both cases the
quantities of particles required would be huge. It might also be possible to reduce albedo in deserts,
by colouring large areas black (perhaps by covering them with plastic sheeting). Such ‘thermal
mountains’ would stimulate convection, hopefully leading to the formation of cumuliform clouds
that would release rain. Most climatologists are wary of such schemes, suspecting that in the unlikely
event that they worked the unanticipated consequences might be unpleasant. Happily, perhaps, their
high cost makes them unattractive to governments.
Varying albedo means some surfaces absorb more solar energy than others, but there are also wide
differences in the way heat is absorbed. On a really hot summer day the surface temperature of sand
on a beach may be high enough to make it painful to walk across it in bare feet, whereas the water is
cool, yet both sand and water are exposed to the same amount of insolation. Dig your feet into the
sand, however, and you soon reach a cooler level. The differences were measured over a Saharan
sand dune at 1600 hours, when the temperature reached its maximum. The air temperature was a
little over 40°C, that of the sand surface 65°C, but 30 cm below the surface the temperature was
about 38°C and 75 cm below the surface it was 25°C (BARRY AND CHORLEY, 1982, p. 288).
Soon after sunset, of course, the sand surface would feel cool.Different materials vary in their response to radiant energy because they have different heat capacities.
Heat capacity is calculated as the ratio of the amount of energy applied, to the resulting rise in
temperature. The heat capacity of water is much greater than that of rock. This means that much
more energy is needed to raise the temperature of water than of rock, or any substance made from
rock. It also means that water loses heat much more slowly than rock (HIDORE AND OLIVER,
1993, p. 58). Consequently, water responds to insolation by warming and cooling slowly and land by
warming and cooling quickly. This explains the difference in temperature between the sand on a
beach and the water beside it, but it also has profound climatic implications.
The rate at which temperature decreases below the surface depends on the conductivity of the material
and its mobility, which affects the transfer of heat by convection. Sand grains conduct heat poorly,
which is why a layer of cool sand lies at quite shallow depth. Although water is not a very good
conductor of heat, heat moves through it readily by convection, and turbulence due to the wind mixes
warmed surface water with cooler water immediately beneath it.

2.8Weather and climate
 Rain, snow, sunshine and showers, wind and storm, are among the phenomena that constitute our
weather, the conditions we experience from day to day in a particular place and which weather
forecasters aim to predict. The average weather conditions experienced over a large area year by
year constitute the climate of that area. The two concepts, of weather and climate, are distinct and
provide the subject matter of two equally distinct scientific disciplines: meteorologists study weather
and climatologists study climates. Obviously the two overlap, for you cannot understand one without
a fairly detailed knowledge of the other. When we discuss the greenhouse effect, for example, we
base our ideas on studies made by climatologists; when we wish to know whether it would be wise
to plan a picnic for the weekend we consult a meteorologist.
Weather phenomena result from interactions between bodies of air and water at different temperatures
and are governed by a small number of general principles. Because air is compressible, atmospheric
pressure decreases with height above sea level. If a ‘bubble’ of air (known technically as a ‘parcel’
of air) is made to rise, therefore, its volume will increase as it enters regions where pressure is lower.
As it expands, the air becomes less dense. This means its molecules are further apart, and in ‘making
more room’ for themselves molecules push one another aside, an activity which requires them to
expend energy. Having less energy, the molecules move more slowly and as they slow down, so the
parcel of air cools. There is no exchange of heat with the surrounding air; the cooling involves only
the expanding parcel. Similarly, if air descends it is compressed, acquires energy, and warms. This
cooling and warming is called ‘adiabatic’ and it is a version of the first law of thermodynamics (which states that in an isolated system, such as a parcel of air, the total internal energy of the
molecules can be changed only by work done by them or on them). The concept of total internal
energy explains why cold air high above us does not simply sink to the surface: were it to do so it
would warm adiabatically to a temperature as high as, or higher than, that of air near sea level;
although it is cold, its ‘potential temperature’ is high (HIDORE AND OLIVER, 1993, p. 112).
The rate at which air temperature decreases with height in the troposphere is called the ‘lapse rate’.
The average sea-level temperature is 15°C, the average tropopause temperature -59°C, and the average
height of the troposphere 11 km, so the ‘standard’ lapse rate is about 6.7°C km-1. The actual lapse
rate, called the ‘environmental’ lapse rate, varies from the standard according to local conditions,
and if air is cooling (or warming) adiabatically its rate of temperature change depends on the amount
of moisture it contains. For dry air, the dry adiabatic lapse rate is 10°C km-1, but if the cooling
triggers the condensation of water vapour the cooling air will be warmed by the latent heat of
condensation, so the saturated adiabatic lapse rate is lower than the dry adiabatic lapse rate. Its value
varies with the amount of condensation, but averages about 6°C km-1.Water vapour is a gas and the amount of it in a particular body of air is expressed as the ‘humidity’
of the air. Humidity can be measured in several ways. Absolute humidity is the mass of water vapour
in a given volume of air, and specific humidity is the mass of water vapour in a given mass of air
(including the water vapour). Relative humidity, which is the measure most widely used, is the
proportion of water vapour in relation to the amount required to saturate the air, and is given as a
percentage. Warm air will hold more water vapour than cool air, so relative humidity varies with
temperature as well as actual water-vapour content. The converse of this is that if air is cooled, a
temperature will be reached at which its water vapour condenses. This is the ‘dewpoint’ temperature.
When water changes phase, between solid and liquid, liquid and gas, or directly (by sublimation)
between solid and gas, energy is either absorbed or released, as latent heat. Latent heat warms or
cools the surrounding air. It is why the air feels warmer when snow starts to fall and cooler when ice
thaws, and it also governs the dynamics of storm clouds, hurricanes, and tornadoes. The amount of
heat is considerable. When 1 gram of water evaporates, 2500 joules of energy is absorbed and the
same amount is released when water vapour condenses; the change between liquid and solid requires
the absorption or release of 334.7 J of energy; and sublimation between solid and vapour requires the
absorption or release of the sum of these, 2834.7 J for every gram.


Chapter 3
3.1Fresh water and the hydrologic cycle
 In the sense used here, a ‘resource’ is a substance a living organism needs for its survival. There are
also non-material resources, such as social contact and status, which may be essential to a feeling of
well-being or even to survival itself, but these are not considered here.
Non-humans as well as humans make use of the resources available to them; animals need such
things as food, water, shelter, and nesting sites, all of which are resources, as are the sunlight and
mineral nutrients required by plants. Human biological requirements are similar to those of other
animals. Like them, we need food, water, and shelter, although we differ from other species in the
means we have developed for obtaining them. It is because human and non-human requirements
often coincide that sometimes we find ourselves in direct competition for resources with non-humans.
It is not only we who find crop plants edible and nutritious, for example, and before we can build
houses to shelter ourselves we must clear the land of its previous, non-human occupants.
Water is, perhaps, the most fundamental of the resources we require. Without water, as the cliché has
it, life could not exist on land. Our bodies are largely water (by weight), and if you add together the
ingredients listed on many food packets you will find they seldom amount to more than about half
the total weight: the remainder is water.
It is not any kind of water we need, of course, but fresh water. Sea water is of only limited use to us, and
out of reach for people living deep inside continents, and drinking it is harmful, although it can be rendered
potable by the removal of its dissolved salts. For the most part, therefore, we humans must obtain all the
water we need from rivers, lakes, and underground aquifers. In the world as a whole, it is estimated that
by the year 2000 we will be using about 4350 km3
 (4.35×1015 litres) of water a year. Of this, almost 60 per
cent will be needed for crop irrigation, 30 per cent for industrial processes and cooling, and 10.5 per cent
for domestic cooking, washing, and drinking (RAVEN ET AL., 1993, p. 273).
Of all the water in the world, 97 per cent is in the oceans, so our freshwater needs must be met from
the remaining 3 per cent. It is not even that simple, however, because of all the fresh water, more than half is frozen in the polar icecaps and glaciers and about 0.5 per cent is so far below ground as to be
beyond our reach. Atmospheric water vapour, falling rain and snow, and flowing rivers contain no
more than about 0.005 per cent of the planet’s water (KUPCHELLA AND HYLAND, 1986, pp.
222–223). Stated like this, the amount available to us sounds alarmingly small, but it is so only as a
proportion of the total. The quantity available to us, including that in lakes and inland seas, is in the
region of 15×1018 litres.
Water can exist as either gas or liquid at temperatures commonly encountered near the surface and
consequently it is constantly evaporating and condensing again. Each year, some 336×1015 litres
evaporates from the oceans and 64×1015 litres from the land surface (including water transpired by
plants). About 300×1015 litres falls as precipitation over the oceans and 100×1015 litres over land, and
36×1015 litres flows from the land back to the sea (HARVEY, 1976, p. 22). This movement of water
between oceans, air, and land constitutes the hydrologic cycle, and by dividing the quantity of water
at each stage of the cycle by the amount entering or leaving, it is possible to discover approximately
the average time a water molecule remains in each: its residence time. This reveals that a molecule
spends about 4000 years in the ocean, 400 years on or close to the land surface, and 10 days as
vapour in the atmosphere.
Most of the water falling on land evaporates again almost immediately or is taken up by plant roots
and returned to the atmosphere by transpiration. Some flows directly over the surface, down slopes
and into lower ground where it may enter lakes, rivers, or marshes. What remains drains downward
through the soil until it encounters a layer of impermeable clay or rock, then flows laterally, very
slowly, through the soil. Were it not to flow, but simply accumulate, the ground would soon be
waterlogged and water would lie at the surface. Above the impermeable material a layer of soil is
saturated with water. This is ground water and its upper limit, above which the soil is not saturated,
is the water table. Permeable material through which ground water flows is called an ‘aquifer’ and it
may lie deep beneath the surface. Aquifers are permeable because the particles of which they are
composed, such as gravel or sand, are not packed together so tightly as to leave no spaces between
them. They are said to be ‘unconsolidated’ and allow water to flow through them. Other aquifers are
made from material, such as chalk or sandstone, which are consolidated (solid) but nevertheless have
fissures, or pore spaces within their granular structure, through which water can flow.

3.2Eutrophication and the life cycle of lakes
 In the late 1960s there was widespread popular concern over the pollution of rivers, lakes, and
ground water by nitrate from sewage, farm effluents, but most of all by leaching from farmed land.
It was feared that high nitrate levels in water might lead to health problems (principally
methaemoglobinaemia, or ‘blue-baby’ syndrome) in infants less than 6 months old.
Methaemoglobinaemia is very rare, but between 1945 and 1960 about 2000 cases were reported in
the world as a whole, causing the deaths of 41 infants in the United States and 80 in Europe. The fear
was not unreasonable. Today, when nitrate levels in water exceed a permitted maximum parents are
advised to use bottled water for mixing infant foods and drinks. There were also fears that nitrates
might form nitrous acid (HNO2
) in the body and react with amides (derived from ammonia by the
substitution of an organic acid group for one (primary amide), two (secondary), or all three (tertiary)
of its hydrogen atoms) or amines (also formed from ammonia, when one or more of its hydrogen
atoms are replaced by a hydrocarbon group). Amines and amides are common and the product of the
reaction would be N-nitrosamines and N-nitrosamides, which are known to cause cancer in
experimental animals. In fact, there is no evidence that nitrate causes cancer in humans (ROYAL
COMMISSION ON ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION, 1979, pp. 87–92). Indeed, dietary nitrates
have no adverse effect whatever on human health. Although nitrites remain impli-cated in infant
methaemoglobinaemia, it is now known that they are formed in feeding bottles by bacterial action on
nitrates contained in the food in the bottle. Nitrates in the water are not involved (L’HIRONDEL,
1999). In parallel with this there was also concern that the nitrate loading of waters would cause their
widespread over-enrichment (eutrophication).
Nitrogen is an essential plant nutrient and plants take it up readily in the form of nitrate (NO3
) ions,
because all nitrates are highly soluble in water. Grass is present throughout the year, so its roots are
always absorbing nitrate. Arable fields, on the other hand, are bare for part of the year, often at times
of heavy rainfall. With no plant roots to intercept the nitrate, it is washed (leached) from the soil.
Nitrate pollution was perceived as a problem in the 1960s because of agricultural changes that had
taken place in Britain in the preceding years.
In 1938, the area of land growing arable crops in Great Britain was smaller than it had been at any
time since the middle of the last century. The depression of the 1930s had so reduced the profitability
of farming that large areas were almost abandoned, and as the Second World War began, with the
likelihood of a sea blockade to restrict the import of food, the British people faced real hunger.
Drastic steps were taken to increase agricultural output and after the war these continued as farming
modernized. A major consequence of these changes was a substantial reduction in the area growing grass and a corresponding increase in the area growing cereals. In 1938, less than 1.2 million ha
was sown to barley and wheat; in 1966 those crops occupied 3.3 million ha. During the same
period, the area devoted to permanent and temporary grassland fell from 8.4 million ha to 6.8
million ha. The 2.1 million ha increase in the cereal area was achieved by reducing the grassland
area. (MAFF, 1968, p. 34)
Thus the change from grassland to cereal cropping led inevitably to an increase in the movement
of nitrate from the soil and into surface and ground water. The widespread introduction of
soluble, nitrogen-based fertilizers exacerbated the problem, especially when heavy applications
were followed by very wet weather, but the fertilizer contribution should not be exaggerated. In
1964, for example, nitrogen runoff was measured following 114 mm of rain in two falls in
Missouri (SMITH, 1967). Bare soil, which had received no fertilizer, lost 0.9 kg N ha-1;
unfertilized maize and oats lost 0.3 kg N ha-1; and continuously grown maize, fertilized with
195 kg N ha-1, lost 0.1 kg N ha-1.
This is not the only source of nitrogen reaching both land and water. Substantial and increasing
amounts also arrive from the air. Elemental nitrogen is oxidized by lightning, in the course of burning
plant materials, and in high-compression internal combustion engines, and biologically by the action
of nitrogen-fixing soil bacteria. Urine from farm livestock releases ammonia, also a soluble compound.
It has been found that in the mid-1970s much of Europe received 2–6 kg N ha-1 yr-1 and that some
areas now receive 60 or more kg N ha-1 yr-1. This level of fertilization may be altering the composition
of certain ecosystems, especially those established on nitrogen-poor soils (MOORE, 1995).
Plants have similar physiological requirements whether they grow on dry land or in water. If
plant nutrients enter water, therefore, they will stimulate the growth of aquatic plants. Nitrate
alone is not enough, of course. The full range of nutrients must be supplied and plant growth is
limited by the availability of the nutrient in shortest supply (in water this is usually phosphorus);
this is the ‘law of the minimum’ first stated in 1840 by the German chemist Justus von Liebig
(1803–73). Other nutrients are less mobile than nitrate, so nitrate leaching has less effect on
plant life than might be supposed.

3.3Salt water, brackish water, and desalination
 Water is a scarce resource in many parts of the world. Even in regions where rainfall is usually
adequate, periodic droughts can bring shortages, and restrictions on water use are fairly common in
Britain, despite its generally moist, maritime climate. These restrictions have never been so severe as
to direct serious attention to alternative sources of supply, however, except on some offshore islands,
such as the Isles of Scilly, in the Western Approaches off Land’s End, where a desalination plant has
been proposed.
Since almost all the water on Earth is in the oceans, sea water is the most obvious place to seek
supplies and, after all, nowhere on the Isles of Scilly is more than a mile or so from the sea. The
disadvantage of sea water, of course, is its salt content. Industrial plants located in coastal areas can
use sea water directly for cooling, which is why many British nuclear power plants are located at the
coast, but sea water is useless for agricultural or domestic purposes. The cells of living organisms
are contained within membranes that are partially permeable, allowing water molecules to pass, but
blocking the passage of larger molecules, in a process known as ‘osmosis’. If a partially permeable
membrane separates two solutions of different concentrations, an osmotic pressure will act across
the membrane, forcing water molecules to pass from the weaker to the stronger solution until the concentrations equalize. When cells are exposed to sea water, its salt concentration is higher than the
concentration inside the cell, and water moves out of the cell. Salt water thus has a dehydrating
effect and its salts must be removed before land-dwelling plants or animals can use it.
This is expensive, and there is another source of fresh water: the polar icecaps. The idea may sound
absurd, but probably it would be technologically and economically feasible to tow large icebergs into
low latitudes, moor them close to the shore, and ‘mine’ them for fresh water. An iceberg would begin
to melt as it entered warm water, but the rate of melting would be low enough to ensure the survival of
the great bulk of the ice and the loss would be acceptable. Clearly, the resource is vast and possibly selfrenewing. There is a major disadvantage, however. Because the communities needing the water are
located far inland, but the iceberg is at the coast, water must still be transported over a long distance.
Combined with the cost of towing, this would probably make the operation prohibitively expensive.
‘Iceberg mining’ has not yet been attempted and neither has a rival scheme, suggested by Walter
Rickel, Governor of Alaska, to construct a submarine pipeline to carry water 3220 km to California
from the headwaters of Alaskan rivers. The scheme was considered, but rejected because of its
estimated $100 billion cost (REINHOLD, 1992).
Desalination (www.ce.vt.edu/enviro2/wtprimer/desalt/desalt/html), on the other hand, is used widely
in the Near and Middle East. It is also used in the United States. For some years the Office of Saline
Water, of the Department of the Interior, has maintained a demonstration desalination plant at Freeport,
Texas, and there is a large plant in Arizona. More recently, water shortages in California led to the
construction of a plant at Catalina yielding 580280 litres of fresh water a day, and plants are also to
be built at Santa Barbara and Morro Bay (REINHOLD, 1992).
The purpose of desalination is the removal of salts from sea water, but not all sea water is equally
saline. Together, temperature and salinity determine the relative densities of different water bodies,
which form water masses analogous to air masses. Plotted on a graph, seawater masses can be identified
by their position along a temperature-salinity (T-S) curve. Salinity is conven-tionally reported in parts
per thousand (per mille). In the centre of the North Atlantic, for example, the T-S curve ranges from
8°C and 35.1 per mille to 19°C and 36.7 per mille; around Antarctica the seawater temperature is 2–
7°C and salinity 34.1–34.6 per mille (HARVEY, 1976, pp. 61–63). Elsewhere, salinity may be markedly
higher or lower. The Mediterranean loses more water by evaporation than it receives from inflowing
rivers and precipitation; it also loses water at depth and gains inflowing water near the surface through
the Straits of Gibraltar. This regime results in a salinity higher than that of the Atlantic, ranging from
about 37.0 per mille near Gibraltar to about 39 per mille at the eastern end. The Black Sea, in contrast,
has an average salinity of about 19.0 per mille, the Caspian 12.86 per mille, and the Red Sea 41.0 per
mille (DAJOZ, 1975, pp. 126–128). Variable though the salinity of sea water is, it remains true that all
sea water is too salty to drink: fresh water has a salinity of less than 0.3 per mille.Water may be separated from its dissolved salts by distillation, freezing, electrolysis, or reverse
osmosis. Distillation is the most widely used method. In low latitudes, the Sun may supply enough
energy to evaporate sea water. The evaporate is then condensed and after several cycles of evaporation
and condensation the water is sufficiently pure to be fed into the public supply. More usually, however,
energy must be provided. Several distillation methods are used. Figure 3.6 illustrates multistage
flash evaporation, which is one of the most efficient. Incoming sea water is heated under pressure, to
prevent it from boiling, then released into a chamber where pressure is lower. It boils instantly
(‘flash boiling’) and the vapour rises, to condense on the pipe carrying cold, incoming sea water. The
latent heat of condensation warms the incoming water, reducing the amount of heating required. The
condensate is collected and removed and the remaining brine fed to the next chamber where the
process is repeated.
Ice contains little salt and so freezing sea water purifies it. In this technique, the sea water is chilled
almost to its freezing temperature, then either sprayed into a partly evacuated chamber or mixed with
a volatile hydrocarbon, such as butane, and poured into a chamber. The low pressure, or high volatility
of the hydrocarbon, causes immediate evaporation of the hydrocarbon or some of the water and the
chilling caused by the latent heat of evaporation causes some of the remaining water to freeze. The
slurry of ice and brine is then pumped into another chamber, fresh water is added to separate ice
from brine, and the fresh water is removed.

3.4Soil formation, ageing, and taxonomy
 From the moment it is exposed at the surface, rock is subjected to persistent physical attack. Water
fills small fissures and when it freezes it expands, exerting a pressure of up to 146 kg cm-2, which
is sufficient to split the toughest rock (DONAHUE ET AL., 1958, p. 28). In summer, the rock
warms during the day and cools again at night, expanding as it warms and contracting as it cools,
but it is heated unevenly. The surface is heated more strongly than rock beneath the surface; some
parts of the surface are exposed directly to sunlight, others are in shade. As a consequence, some
parts of the rock expand and contract more than others. This, too, causes the rock to break. Often
flakes are loosened or detached from the surface, a process called ‘exfoliation’. Detached particles
then grind against one another as they are moved by gravity, wind, or water. This breaks them into
still smaller pieces.
The smaller any physical object, the greater its surface area in relation to its volume: a sphere with a
diameter of 4 units has a surface area of 50 units2
the rock particles grow smaller, therefore, the total surface area exposed to attack increases. Still
vulnerable to abrasion, they are now subject to chemical attack.
This takes several forms. Some of the chemical compounds of which they are composed may be
soluble in water; wetting dissolves and drainage removes them. Other compounds may react chemically
with water. The process is called ‘hydrolysis’ and can convert insoluble compounds to more soluble
ones. Orthoclase feldspar (KAlSi3O8), for example, a common constituent of igneous rocks, hydrolyses
to a partly soluble clay (HAlSi3O8) and very soluble potassium hydroxide (KOH) by the reaction:Hydration is the process in which compounds combine with water, but do not react chemically with
it. The addition of water to a compound’s molecules makes them bigger and softer and so increases
their vulnerability to breakage. Oxidation also increases the size and softness of many mineral
molecules and may also alter their electrical charge in ways that make them react more readily with
water or weak acids. Reduction, which occurs where oxygen is in short supply, also alters the electrical
charge on molecules and may reduce their size.
Compounds may also react with carbonic acid (H2CO3), formed when carbon dioxide dissolves in
water. This reaction, called ‘carbonation’, forms soluble bicarbonates. Barely soluble calcium
carbonate (CaCO3), for example, becomes highly soluble calcium bicarbonate (Ca(HCO3)2).
Physical and chemical processes thus combine to alter radically the structure and chemical composition
of surface rock. How long it takes for solid rock to be converted into a layer of small mineral
particles depends on the character of the original rock and the extent of its exposure; in arid climates

3.5Mining and processing of fuels
 Originally, the word ‘fossil’ described anything dug up from below ground; zoologists still describe
burrowing animals as ‘fossorial’. Later, the word came to be applied to the preserved remains or
traces of organisms that lived long ago (technically, more than ten thousand years ago). What we call
‘fossil fuels’ warrant their name on both grounds, but it may be more informative to describe them as
‘carbonaceous’, or ‘carbon-based’ fuels, because their combustion represents the rapid oxidation to
carbon dioxide of the carbon they contain, which is an exothermic (heat-releasing) reaction.
Ordinarily, metabolic wastes and dead organisms are decomposed more or less rapidly. Most of the
organisms responsible for decomposition require oxygen for respiration, however, and in anoxic
environments their activities are curtailed. Under these circumstances it is possible for organic matter
to become trapped, compressed beneath the weight of material that continues to accumulate above it,
and subjected to rather different processes. Suitably airless environments are found, for example, in
seafloor muds and below the surface of bogs and some swamps.
Plant material buried below the surface of a bog may be compressed into peat. If, later, the bog partly
dries, the peat remains and can be dug for use as fuel. In some countries, such as Ireland, it is used
in electricity power stations. Peat is the first stage in the formation of coal, into which it is converted
by being subjected to much greater pressure and then heated: a 1 m seam of coal probably began as
a 12 m layer of peat. The conditions necessary for the formation of coal occur only in the swamps
found beside tropical rivers and seashores. Some of the coal being mined now formed around 400 Coal and peat contain ‘volatiles’, substances that are given off as gases when the material is heated
in the absence of air, and the quality of the fuel is determined by the proportion of volatiles it
contains: the lower the proportion the more energy the fuel will release when burned. Peat contains
more than 50 per cent volatiles, lignite (a soft, brown coal) about 45 per cent, and anthracite about 10
per cent. Anthracite is the highest quality, and very hard. Bituminous coal, the most abundant type
and the one most widely used domestically, has 18–35 per cent volatiles.
Petroleum forms by a somewhat similar process. Organic material is buried by sediment, usually in
a river delta, and is then trapped between two layers of impermeable rock. Many oil deposits are
found beneath anticlines: rock strata that have been folded upwards into domed shapes. A similar
structure occurs where a large mass of salt, deep below the surface, rises slowly through the less
dense material surrounding it and the dense rock sinks to replace it. The process is called ‘diapirism’
and the salt dome it produces a ‘diapir’. Oil is often found in ‘salt-dome traps’. The material is then
strongly compressed and heated. The resulting fluid fills all the pore spaces within the porous rock
around it (ALLABY, 1992, pp. 162–163).
Some of the carbon and hydrogen comprising the organic matter form methane (CH4), associated with
both coal and oil. In coal mines, methane can cause fires, but when associated with oil it can be
extracted and used as the fuel known as ‘natural gas’ (to distinguish it from ‘town gas’, mainly carbon
monoxide (CO), obtained by heating coal and formerly an important industrial and domestic fuel).
Coal occurs in seams of varying thickness and at varying depths. There are four ways in which
access can be gained to the seams and the coal extracted, illustrated in Figure 3.17. Seams at
great depth are approached by sinking a shaft vertically from the surface, with associated shafts
for ventilation. Most traditional British mines were shaft mines of this type, working deep seams.A slope mine approaches the seam through an angled shaft and a drift mine approaches horizontally.
Where seams lie too close to the surface for a shaft to be cut to them, the overlying material is
removed to expose the coal. This is an open-cast mine if it exposes a substantial part of the seam all
at the same time and a strip mine if the seam is exposed and worked in sections.
All coal mining produces wastes, consisting of soil and rock that must be removed to gain access to
the coal and rock mixed with the coal that must be separated from it. It is possible to store this waste,
in ‘spoil heaps’, until the mine is exhausted then return it to below ground, but this is by no means
the general practice and mining more commonly produces large, black spoil heaps. These are composed
of finely crushed material with almost no soil and little in the way of plant nutrients. The heaps often
contain large amounts of iron pyrites (FeS), producing very acid conditions (pH 2.0–4.0), and acid
liquor, also containing metals, may leach from the heap into nearby watercourses, where it causes
severe pollution. It is possible to reclaim mining spoil heaps. If they are treated with lime to reduce
the acidity and soil and fertilizer supplied, a cover of grass can be established, leading in time to a
more diverse plant community (MELLANBY, 1992, pp. 44–45).
Open-cast and strip mining can be even more destructive. In the past, large areas of attractive
countryside were stripped of their soil (the ‘overburden’), which was dumped in large heaps,
and when the seam was exhausted the site was just left, utterly devastated. In some countries
this is still the practice, but in many the planning consent stipulates that when operations cease
the overburden must be returned to the surface and the site restored to a state better than its
original condition. The effect is not always so destructive as it may appear in the older industrial
countries, such as Britain. Coal seams suitable for open-cast or strip working often occur close
to deeper seams that have been mined in the past to feed nearby industries, leaving land already
in a state of industrial dereliction that restoration can improve once mining has ceased. In strip
mining, restoration begins long before mining ceases, the reclamation of each strip starting as
soon as the extractive machinery has moved on to the next strip. Indeed, British planning
regulations are now stringent, and open-cast mining has little adverse long-term effect on areas
of conservation or wildlife importance.

Chapter 4
4.1Biosphere, biomes, biogeography

4.2Major biomes

4.3Nutrient cycles

4.4Trophic relationships

4.5Energy, numbers, biomass

4.6Ecosystems

4.7Colonization


Chapter 5
5.1Evolution

5.2Adaptation

5.3Biodiversity

5.4Fisheries

5.5Forests

5.6Farming for food and fibre

5.7Genetic engineering


Chapter 6 
6.1Wildlife conservation

6.2Pest control

6.3Restoration ecology

6.4Pollution control

6.5Hazardous waste

6.6Transnational pollution