Chapter 1
1.1What Is a Thesis?
 Simply defined, a thesis is an extended argument. To pass, a thesis must demonstrate logical, 
structured, and defensible reasoning based on credible and verifiable evidence presented in such 
a way that it makes an original contribution to
knowledge, as judged by experts in the field. Among the many types of scholarly
productions, theses are an oddity: each one is different, and there are no standard
or generic constructions. Most of those who supervise theses have written just one,
and, despite the effort they take to produce, the only people who carefully read
a given thesis are the project supervisors, the examiners, and an otherwise rather
select audience of specialized academics.
From the start, it is good to have a solid idea of what a thesis is, and perhaps the
best place to start a discussion of theses is with their purpose. What do examiners
look for when they judge your work?

1.2Criteria for Examination
 When universities send out a thesis for examination, they include their suggested
guidelines for the examiners. I recommend that you get a copy of these guidelines
from your own university (they are almost certainly available online) and look them
over carefully. Make an effort, too, to understand the process of submission and
examination.
At my university, the University of Melbourne < unimelb.edu.au >, the guidelines begin by 
listing key attributes of a successful thesis (quoted from the university’s 
School of Graduate Research website, as of November 2010):

1.3Attributes of a Successful Thesis
 The thesis demonstrates authority in the candidate’s field and shows evidence of
command of knowledge in relevant fields.
It shows that the candidate has a thorough grasp of the appropriate methodological techniques 
and an awareness of their limitations.It makes a distinct contribution to knowledge.Its contribution 
to knowledge rests on originality of approach and/or interpretation of the findings and, in some cases, 
the discovery of new facts.It demonstrates an ability to communicate research findings effectively in the
professional arena and in an international context.It is a careful, rigorous and sustained piece of work 
demonstrating that a research ‘apprenticeship’ is complete and the holder is admitted to the community
of scholars in the discipline.
At first glance these guidelines may appear to refer to the thesis, but they are really
about the candidate. The first point makes this explicit: ‘The thesis demonstrates
authority in the candidate’s field’. And consider the last point. The examiner has to
consider whether the thesis ‘is a careful, rigorous and sustained piece of work’—but
see how it goes on—‘demonstrating that a research “apprenticeship” is complete
and the holder is admitted to the community of scholars in the discipline’.
At the start of introductory seminars in thesis writing, I ask students to explain
the purpose of a thesis. Often they say something like, ‘To tell people in my area
about my research’. No doubt your research is of interest, but your primary purpose
in writing a thesis is to pass an examination. These examiners are not reading your
work out of mere interest: from the above criteria, we see that examiners read your
thesis to assess whether or not you have demonstrated your fitness to be admitted
to a community of scholars. Because a written thesis is an examination paper, not
simply a report of research findings, you need to understand what examiners are
looking for when they read your work. In the case of doctoral theses, examiners
are encouraged to consider eight questions (quoted from the same website):

1.4Guidelines for Examiners
 Does the candidate show sufficient familiarity with, and understanding and critical appraisal of, the relevant literature?
Does the thesis provide a sufficiently comprehensive investigation of the topic?Are the methods and techniques adopted appropriate 
to the subject matter and are they properly justified and applied? Are the results suitably set out and accompanied by adequate exposition and
interpretation? Are conclusions and implications appropriately developed and clearly linked to
the nature and content of the research framework and findings?Have the research questions in fact been tested? Is the literary quality 
and general presentation of the thesis of a suitably high
standard? Does the thesis as a whole constitute a substantive original contribution to
knowledge in the subject area with which it deals?
These questions really are about the thesis rather than the candidate. They roughly
parallel the structure of a solid thesis, and each builds on the previous one.
The first two questions are about familiarity with the previous work in your
field and the demonstration of a critical approach to it. Note that, from the start,
having and demonstrating a critical attitude towards your subject sets the tone of
your interactions with the examiners.
The third question is about choosing appropriate research methods and justifying
your choices as appropriate to the topic. Be aware that it is you, at this point, who
must set the scope of that topic that will determine the appropriateness of a methodology. 
Further, the third question alerts examiners to show concern for the manner
in which the methods are applied.
The fourth question focuses on displaying the results, explaining them and
showing that you know what they mean. Here, then, it is not simply a question of
showing those in the discipline area what you have found but also that you know
how to present the results.
The fifth and sixth questions remind examiners to check the alignment, and connections, 
between an initial aim and the final conclusions. The logic flow in the
thesis must be right. Notice, too, the emphasis on linking your interpretations back
to what you said you would do earlier in the thesis.
The seventh question invites the reader to step away from the empirical side of
the study to consider how well you can write. In a sense, the question signals to both
you and the examiners just how important it is to be able to be able to communicate
well within the international research community.
Finally, the eighth question asks examiners to consider the quality of the work
as a whole. For doctoral students, producing work that is a ‘substantive original
contribution to knowledge’ is a primary goal that can be reached through writing
satisfactory responses to the series of previous questions.
There are other questions an examiner might also address. In particular, an examiner 
would look for evidence of insightful or critical thinking, and of objective appraisal 
of outcomes of the study. That is, they want to be persuaded that the student
can think clearly and can construct a reasoned argument.

1.5Types of Thesis
 This book focuses on PhD study, but there are several other forms of research work
that are understood to be theses. In the Australian context, the word ‘thesis’ is used
to refer to the document that a student creates to earn a degree at the Honours, Masters, 
or doctoral level. (In other countries, such as the United States or Canada, the
word ‘thesis’ is commonly used to signify work at the Honours or Masters degree
level and ‘dissertation’ is generally used to refer to doctoral work.) What is the 
difference between the different understandings of a thesis?
At Honours level, a thesis—strictly, a ‘minor thesis’—is a work of original
research of approximately 10,000 words in length. For many students undertaking a
minor thesis, it is the first time that they have conducted original research. From my
experience, one of the main struggles occurs in making the transition from ‘research
consumption’ to ‘research production’. Minor theses are closely supervised and, very
often, stem from research that is of direct interest to the supervisor. An Honours thesis
is typically produced within a year alongside the demands of coursework. For the
most part, they are assessed within the students’ department; note, therefore, that the
readership is well-known and thus the writing can be tailored to fit the audience.
At the Masters degree level, there are two types of theses. One is a minor thesis,
with length limits ranging from 10,000 to 25,000 words. It is completed within one
or two years alongside coursework, and usually requires one or two semesters of
full-time effort. Much like those at the Honours level, minor theses are assessed
within the department by a set of internal criteria.
The second type is a ‘Masters by research’ thesis of 30,000 to 40,000 words. It
is much more substantial than those that are written by coursework students as it
is the result of full-time research over one to two years. This thesis is examined by
experts in the field outside the department. In some departments, students first join
the field by writing a Masters thesis; if it is considered to be of high quality and can
be extended, it can be converted into a doctoral thesis.
A ‘Doctor of Philosophy’ is earned by the successful completion of a PhD thesis.
For PhD students, the word limit of a thesis is 1,00,000 words; most students write
approximately 80,000 words. In Australia, a PhD thesis is typically produced in
3 years of full-time study. It is examined by two experts who have themselves supervised doctoral 
work; and they are likely to be located at an international research
institution.
There are other types of doctorate, too, including those in education, by exhibition (in fine arts), 
or by publication, but these are beyond the scope of this book. All
of these should be described in the policies on your university’s website.

1.6Look at Other Theses
 It’s now time to look at some other theses. Most supervisors have a few on their
shelves that they may be willing to lend you. Reading these works will be a good
start, but don’t stop there. Probably they follow a pattern set by your supervisor’s
own ideas of a good thesis, and almost certainly they will be typical of what your
own department thinks is acceptable. So go out and look at theses from across a
range of disciplines, and even theses from other countries. As presentation and
style change relatively rapidly, look at theses that are no more than 3 years old.
If applicable, examine a mix of kinds of studies, both qualitative and quantitative (see Chap. 8). 
Try and find work that is outside your field, but makes use
of a similar methodology. After you have skimmed several, select some that are
coherent, and some that are not so clear, and go through a few of them with your
supervisor.
Read the theses as if you were an examiner. With the guidelines for examiners
in front of you, begin the assessment of each of them by first looking at the overall
layout. See if the table of contents gives you a clear idea of the structure of the work
as a whole. Then browse the introduction and conclusions, and look through the reference section. Next, 
read the introduction carefully and compare it to the conclusions to see if the work is linked in a coherent manner (see the fifth question in the
guidelines for examiners on page 3). It might surprise you to find that some theses
fail to make this link. Look especially for specific formatting and conventions: How
are particular words spelled? What is the best way to display data? What is the typical length of a chapter? 
You may be impressed with the virtues of some theses, such
as professional layouts, innovative displays of complex material in graphs or tables,
or a strong integration of online materials. Stay alert for the points that impress you,
and make a note to adopt them for your own work.

1.7Examiners’ Reports
 Students are sometimes advised to track down examiners’ reports on submitted theses. For the most part, 
the examination process is confidential, but make an effort
to ask a completed student for a report or see if a supervisor is willing to share an
examination that is anonymous. As you read examiners’ reports, or the associated
studies on them, get in the frame of mind of these expert assessors. What do they
look for, and what do they ignore? Do they directly answer the suggested questions put forward by the university? These reports will be highly variable in detail
and approach; What can you learn from these differences? Additionally, seek out
academic studies that concern thesis examination (search for the keywords: thesis
quality, doctoral assessment, research training, PhD examination) with a view to
developing a better understanding of the assessment process. Feedback from examiners is summarized in the Appendix, 
which is a digest of observations from
examiners’ reports.
I have examined numerous theses of each type: minor, Masters, and doctoral. In
each case, my purpose is to assess the work with reference to the criteria at hand.
My considerations vary. At times I focus my comments on the big picture; at other
times I hone in on details. My motivations for examination are not necessarily to
hand out criticism, or even praise, but to sharpen a study. Academics examine theses
partially out of service to the profession and partly as a favour to those who ask,
but mostly to learn something new before the work is presented at conferences or
published in journals. In short, as an examiner, I am looking to learn and, in this
way, I’m just like the candidate.
Consider the five potential outcomes of PhD examination at my university
(edited slightly for clarity) that an examiner can choose from:
Be awarded the degree of Doctor of Philosophy without further examination or
amendment.
Be awarded the degree of Doctor of Philosophy without further examination,
subject to inserting in the thesis the minor corrections or additions as specified
to the satisfaction of the Chair of Examiners, without further reference to the
examiner.
Be awarded the degree of Doctor of Philosophy subject to revising part or parts
of the thesis to the examiners’ satisfaction.
Not yet be awarded the degree, but be permitted to resubmit the thesis in a revised form for re-examination. Areas requiring major amendment are identified
in an examiners’ report.
Not be awarded the degree of Doctor of Philosophy and not be permitted to submit for re-examination.
Think for a moment of the implications of each of these outcomes. Remember, first
of all, that there are two expert examiners who are assessing the work. If a student
is awarded a PhD because both examiners have marked that it fits the first criteria,
no more amendments are required. Nothing, not even occasional typos, requires
change: the only thing left to do is to make a bound, final copy to be archived at the
university, and perhaps submit an electronic copy to be placed online.
Many students (including myself) earn the second mark. That is, they have been
awarded the PhD, and no further examination is required, but there is a need to make
some corrections, write out a report to the Chair detailing the required changes, and
reprint the thesis for submission. By awarding a PhD based on the third outcome,
an examiner indicates that the student must revise entire sections. Substantial work
is required, and the revised and reprinted thesis must be sent back to the examiner
for checking. The use of the fourth mark by an examiner indicates that the thesis
requires such major revisions that a PhD cannot yet be awarded, but the work can
be re-submitted. Finally, on occasion, examiners use the fifth outcome to deny both
an award of a PhD and a chance to submit a revised thesis.
Examination processes for minor theses are highly variable, with students being awarded pass/fail 
in some cases or a mark in others. Some processes allow for
resubmission; some do not; examination may be within the department. In many
institutions Masters theses are handled in the same way as PhDs, but in some places
different processes are used. Make sure that you are familiar with the mechanisms
that apply to your degree.

1.8Summary of Chapter 1: What Is a Thesis?
 There is no ‘standard’ definition of a thesis but it is generally understood to be
the result of structured, original research that is produced for assessment.
The expectations for a thesis vary from university to university, field to field, and
supervisor to supervisor.
There are several types of theses in the range of research higher degrees. Some
theses are produced alongside the demands of coursework, and others fulfil the
total requirements of the degree. The types of thesis vary in length, complexity,
comprehensiveness, and even purpose.
On examination:
You need to understand the criteria for examination of theses, and be sure to craft
your own work so that it meets these criteria. Be familiar, from the start, with the
attributes that are expected of student candidates.
It can be rewarding to read and analyze theses both from your own field and
across other disciplines. Note weaknesses that you wish to avoid, and strengths
that might be adapted for your own work.
A summary of examiners’ responses is included as an appendix to this book.
Online resources:
There are numerous online indexes of theses and dissertations. For example,
many Australian and New Zealand theses are available at the National Library of
Australia’s website, or through individual university library collections.
Your university library should provide access (in paper or online) to all of the
university’s PhD theses.
Policies for examination, and descriptions of thesis types, should be on your
university’s website. You should also browse your university’s policies and
procedures that relate to research candidature.

Chapter 2
2.1Thesis Structure
 Karen was undertaking a PhD in engineering to investigate whether a new type of
plastic was safe to use as cookware. When she started her lab work, she decided
to begin writing her thesis, but despite her determination she was having trouble. I
knew Karen well, and she was a very good student who had been interested in new
plastics ever since her undergraduate studies several years ago.
Karen decided that the first thing to do was to write a review of the literature. I told
her to send me an outline of how she expected to tackle it soon—but after two weeks
nothing had yet appeared. I asked her what the problem was. ‘No problem’, she replied, 
‘I just have a lot more papers to read. When I’ve read and summarized them,
then I can start writing’. I reminded her that she’d told me a similar story a few weeks
earlier: after reading a few more articles, she would indeed start writing. While reading those, 
however, she’d turned up several more. And then there was the material
that she had listed to read in the future. Karen then showed me several summaries,
and each was separate. At that point, I concluded that she was never going to start.
Seemingly, Karen had told herself that finding ‘a few more papers’ was the reason
for her continued delay, but from experience, I realized that her problem lay deeper.

2.2Why We Have Trouble with New Tasks
 When we start a new project, figuring out how to proceed is easy if the project is
similar to things we’ve done in the past. Building a bookcase, say, is not a big challenge 
for someone who has already made a kitchen cupboard. But an entirely new
task is another matter: every aspect is unfamiliar, and it is not obvious how to begin
or what the obstacles will be. We may not even know how to think about the problem. Imagine 
the state of mind of someone whose practical experience is limited
to building kitchen cupboards, but who is asked to build a three-bedroom house.
There will be many questions: Where to buy the materials? What materials? What
tools are needed? Will the walls be strong enough? How to arrange for plumbers
and plasterers? What is the first step? The task of starting to write a thesis may be
equally as challenging.
Research is unpredictable. In nearly every project I’ve been connected with, the
conclusions contained some unexpected elements. In most projects the aim of the
work changed as it progressed, sometimes several times. I’ve often—startlingly
often!—had students say that their ‘experiments had failed’, but, when we had
absorbed the implications of the supposed failure, new hypotheses emerged that
resulted in breakthroughs in their research. On several occasions truly surprising
conclusions were staring the student (and me) in the face, yet we failed to see them
for weeks, or longer, because we were so hooked on what we expected to find. That
is, continuing the analogy above, we may not even be sure of what kind of building
we are trying to construct.
Moreover, the process of research is often not entirely rational. In the classical
application of the ‘scientific method’, the researcher is supposed to develop a hypothesis, then design a crucial experiment to test it. If the hypothesis withstands this
test a generalization is then argued for, and an advance in understanding has been
made. But where did the hypothesis come from in the first place? I have a colleague
whose favourite question is ‘Why is this so?’, and I’ve seen this innocent question
spawn brilliant research projects on quite a few occasions. Research is a mixture
of inspiration (hypothesis generation, musing over the odd and surprising, finding
lines of attack on difficult problems) and rational thinking (design and execution
of crucial experiments, analysis of results in terms of existing theory). Most of
the books on research methods and design of experiments—there are hundreds of
them—are concerned with the rational part, and fail to deal with the creative part,
yet without the creative part no real research would be done, no new insights would
be gained, and no new theories would be formulated.
A major part of producing a thesis is, of course, creating an account of the outcome
of this rational–creative research process, and writing it is also a rational–creative
process. However, the emphasis in the final product is far more on the rational side
than the creative side—we have to convince the examiners with our arguments. Yet
all of us know that we do write creatively, at least in the fine detail of it. We talk of our
pens (or fingers on the keyboard) running ahead of our brains, as if our brains were
the rational part of us and our fingers were the creative part. We tend to separate one
from the other. Of course this is nonsense, and we know it, yet the experience is there.
Wrestling with this problem has led me to the view that all writing, like all research, involves the tension between the creative and the rational parts of our brains.
It is this tension—as well as our lack of experience in the specific task of writing
theses—that makes it so hard for us to start writing, and sometimes gives us ‘writer’s block’. To get started, we must resolve the tension.

2.3Structuring Your Thesis
 A colleague was concerned about the draft thesis that had been submitted to him
by Henry, one of his students, and asked me to look at it. It was certainly difficult
to know what was going on. Henry had written the draft straight from a logbook,
experiment after experiment, in chronological order:
In other words, Henry had presented a condensed diary, which certainly detailed the work he had undertaken but lacked the essential elements of a
thesis: motivations for decisions made, interpretation and explanation, linking of
data to conclusions, and argument supporting propositions and hypotheses. Your
task as a writer is to document your processes, but equally to make these processes and the outcome of your work comprehensible to readers—not to explain how
you spent your time, or to describe the hypotheses that ultimately didn’t make
sense. You need to structure your thesis in such a way that you take the reader
from the aim to the conclusions, via the evidence and arguments, in the clearest
possible way.
As noted, there is no such thing as a standard thesis, but a careful reading of the
guidelines for examination does suggest that there is a standard thesis structure.
In essence, a thesis must first motivate the study, present background material and
conduct a study. Results must be well argued and displayed, and the thesis has to
end with a sound conclusion. My experience is that this standard structure works
well for theses in the physical, biomedical, mathematical, and social sciences. The
nature of research in the humanities is different from that in the sciences, and different forms of reportage may be appropriate for theses in different areas.

2.4The ‘Standard’ Thesis Structure
 The standard thesis structure has four parts: an introduction, the background, the
core (for want of a better word), and a synthesis. Note how, as illustrated in the
following figure, the sections are connected to each other. A conclusion responds
directly to an aim, for example, and the background must directly foreshadow the
core.
Some of these parts might contain more than one chapter, and the core might be
more than half the thesis. Each of these parts has a distinct role.
The introduction explains what the thesis is about: the problem that the thesis
is concerned with, the aims and scope, and the thesis structure. In some disciplines
it includes an overview of the findings. An introduction is typically written for a
wider readership than the bulk of the thesis, and may use illustrative examples to
help underpin the reader’s understanding of what you are trying to achieve. Such
examples help to create a narrative that a reader can use as context for your work.
However, an introduction isn’t an essay—the only purpose it has is to introduce the
research. You should outline the problem you have investigated, explain the aim of
the research and any limits on the scope of the work, and then provide an overview
of what lies ahead. Five to ten pages is ample.
The background is the knowledge required before a reader can understand your
research: relevant history, context, current knowledge, theory and practice, and
other researchers’ views. In the background, your purpose is to position your study
in the context of what has gone before, what is currently taking place, and how research in the area is conducted. It might contain a historical review. If the research is
location-specific (an investigation of diet in low-income suburbs, for example, or an
examination of how a dialect is changing) you will need to describe the study area
and its characteristics; if the research is technology-specific (such as a study of food
packaging or the yield of a harvesting machine) you will need to describe the specifics of this technology and how it affects the questions you can ask. The background
usually contains a chapter reviewing current theory or practice, and may include the
results of preliminary experiments or surveys carried out to help you feel your way
into the problem. Experiments may also be used to establish benchmarks based on
other work against which your work is to be measured, and these too form part of
the background.
The core concerns your own work: your propositions or hypotheses, innovations, experimental designs, surveys and reviews, results, analysis, and so on.
(This is sometimes called the contribution, though in a strong thesis the background too forms part of the contribution, as other researchers may value your
interpretation and analysis of past work as much as they value the ‘new’ work
presented in the core.) The core can easily form the bulk of the thesis and consist
of several chapters.
The synthesis draws together your contribution to the topic. It will usually contain a discussion in which you critically examine your own results in the light of the
previous state of the subject as outlined in the background, and make judgments as
to what has been learnt in your work; the discussion may be a separate chapter, or
may be integrated with the detailed work in the core. Finally, it is where you summarise the discussion and evaluation to produce conclusions. These should respond
directly to the aim of the work as stated in the introduction.
The structure of the core varies greatly from discipline. In one thesis, the first of
the chapters in the core might be a description of a survey tool and an explanation of
how it is linked to an investigation of why obese people make poor dietary choices;
the next might be a presentation and statistical analysis of the results; and the next
two chapters a presentation of a detailed study of a small number of individuals,
looking at the impact of methods of changing their behaviour. In another thesis, the
first core chapter might sketch why it is plausible that a particular food has an effect
on the immune system; the next might propose specific chemistry that would cause
this effect; the next might describe an experimental design to test for this chemistry;
and so on.
A common factor is that the core is a narrative leading from a proposition to an
outcome, linked by evidence and argument. In a more complex thesis, there may
be a series of linked propositions, each independently supported by evidence and
argument. I return to this issue in Chap. 7.
Below is a typical application of this structure, for a thesis examining the role
of labels in diet choices. The thesis has three background chapters, which examine
two aspects of labelling—legislative requirements and marketing—and social issues around food choices. These insights are used to develop a research survey for
identifying the level of understanding of and belief in labels, which in turn is used
to propose and test the impact of alternative labelling mechanisms.
The Influence of Food Labelling on Young Adult Diet
Chapter 1 Introduction
Chapter 2 Food Labelling Legislation
Chapter 3 Food Marketing Strategies
Chapter 4 Factors in Young Adult Choices
Chapter 5 Research Method
Chapter 6 Comprehensibility of Food Labels
Chapter 7 Alternative Label Designs
Chapter 8 Identification of Effective Labelling Factors
Chapter 9 Discussion
Chapter 10 Conclusions
These four parts (introduction, background, core, and synthesis) are examined in
detail in Chaps. 5–10. My aim in this chapter is to convince you that you should
ensure that each of them is progressively developed as your writing proceeds. A
strong thesis is the product of considered work, where there has been opportunity to
debate, revise, and evaluate each chapter at leisure; and is particularly strong if the
components are tightly integrated. This integration is most easily achieved if they
are written concurrently.
How many chapters should a PhD thesis have? If there are four main parts, each
containing one to three chapters, we should not expect more than eight or ten chapters altogether. Many theses are accomplished in five to seven chapters. If you have
more, you should suspect that some are really only sections, and need to be consolidated. In some disciplines, theses are assembled by editing papers that the student
has published during the candidature to produce a coherent whole. With careless
editing, such an approach can easily lead to a series of brief or fragmentary chapters
that don’t form a consistent and sustained argument; that is, the collection cannot
in itself be considered a thesis. In far too many cases some of these chapters are
preliminary work, or work that it is off-topic, that shouldn’t be included at all. My
experience is that producing a thesis in this way is usually much harder than the
student expects—often the student feels that, since the papers were published, they
are ‘finished’ and all that is required is to gather them together—whereas even an
experienced writer needs at least 5 or 6 months to turn a set of papers into an acceptable thesis.
My university once asked me to report on a request for financial assistance to
publish a thesis as a book. It had around thirty chapters! The simple and coherent
structure discussed above was totally obscured by the proliferation of chapters with
seemingly arbitrary titles. The effect was total fragmentation of the reasoning and
impact, and I was surprised that the examiners had passed it.

2.5Narrative
 One way to think of the role of structure, and signposting, is as a kind of guide that
walks readers along a road from what they did know (past knowledge) to what they
should know (a knowledge frontier). When you write a thesis, it can be helpful to
reflect on what you knew—and how you thought—when you began your work.
This earlier ‘you’ is the person you are writing for. The story, or narrative, that takes
the reader along the road should be as straightforward as you can make it. That is,
you may think to yourself: I have had to fumble, and explore, and make mistakes to
get here, but I am now writing the guidebook that helps the next person to painlessly
come to the same point of view and the same knowledge.
A key element to good writing is to clearly understand what the writing is meant
to achieve. In my view, the twin concepts of narrative and audience—what you are
trying to say, and who you are saying it to—are the most important lessons a writer
can learn.
Look for the structure behind the material you are describing, and don’t confuse
narrative with structure. The narrative concerns how you want the reader’s thoughts
to develop as they read the thesis. The structure is how the material is organized to
create a narrative. Different structures may be appropriate in different areas, particularly between 
the humanities and (in the broadest sense) sciences. In an empirical study, the structure might be: the problem and its significance; relationship to
previous work; derivation of hypotheses; design of experiments; results; analysis
and interpretations; conclusions (with, perhaps, two series of experiments, the second resting on the outcomes of the first). In contrast, in a literary study the structure
might be: the purpose of the study and its contribution to knowledge; evaluation of
previous studies; procedures, limitations, and assumptions; sources and documentation; analysis of facts and evaluation of evidence; conclusions. These structures are
not identical, but there are strong similarities.
There are other differences between theses. In some disciplines, it is the norm
for a thesis to be a consolidation of several papers; in others, the thesis is usually a
single large piece of work. Some emphasize quantitative work, with, in the extreme,
a thesis where the contribution is mathematical theories or lab experiments that
lead to precisely quantifiable outcomes; others emphasize qualitative work, with,
for example, discussion and argument based on documentary sources and other
researchers’ interpretations of records of events.
Something that all theses have in common is the need for analysis and reflective
consideration of the issues. Too often, researchers run the risk of merely describing
their complex settings and ignore the need to demonstrate critical thinking.

2.6Non-standard Thesis Structures
 Some theses do not fit into a standard structure. Across a wide range of disciplines
there is a trend towards a blending, for example, of quantitative and qualitative approaches. Such work might include, for example, an in-depth examination of the
context and history of a situation before arriving at a ‘statement of the problem’.
A quantitative survey might inform the development of interview questions, and
these in turn might lead to analyses of the results that may suggest yet another
series of questions. A series of chemical experiments may be inspired by a revisiting of a historical dispute, and be built on an analysis of arguments for competing
methodologies. A conceptual framework may be an outcome and not a starting
point.If you are writing a thesis that relies on a non-standard structure—or are writing
a thesis where the approach and problem might, in traditional terms, be ‘interdisciplinary’—don’t make the mistake of trying to reinvent the form of the thesis from
scratch. Take the time to find other theses that have pursued similar problems in a
similar way; read these theses, and others, to help yourself decide how your work
should be organized and presented. Make sure you are familiar with the methods of
both qualitative and quantitative research; there are many excellent books on these
topics, some written for specific disciplines but readable by a broad audience, such
as the books on statistical research methods for psychology. And it is essential that
you establish a clear line of argument throughout your work.
As discussed in Chap. 1, be sure that you know the criteria for examination. Just
because you are doing something ‘different’, you are not excused from creating a
strong academic argument that is underpinned by sound evidence, credible analysis,
and clear writing. How to use these elements in creation of a strong thesis is the
subject of the next few chapters.

2.7Summary of Chapter 2: Thesis Structure
 Your thesis should be organized as follows.
1An Introductory Chapter
Tell the reader the problem you are tackling in this project.
State clearly how you aim to deal with this problem.
Limit the scope of your study.
Sketch out how the thesis is structured to achieve your aim.
2Background Chapters
Include in these chapters all the material required to lead up to your own
work.
Ensure that there is a flow of narrative that explains why each topic is being
discussed.
3A ‘Core’ Account of Your Own Work
Begin with a formal statement of your hypotheses or research questions.
Follow this with an account of the methods you chose to test your hypotheses
or answer your questions, and why you chose them.
Report the results of applying these methods.
4Synthesis
You are now ready to pull the whole thesis together.
Discuss the implications of your results.
Draw strong conclusions backed up by your discussion.
Check that they respond to the aim stated in your introduction.
Things to consider:
Are you are blocked in your writing, or procrastinating? Do you understand
why? If not, discuss it with someone.
Think about how your thesis will work as a narrative.
Decisions about organization should have a rational foundation. Satisfy yourself
that you have good reasons for your chosen thesis structure.


Chapter 3
3.1Mechanics of Writing
 Given a structure, the next challenge is to actually begin writing. Strategies for
writing are the subject of the next chapter. In this chapter, I take a brief detour and
consider some of the tools of writing and communication.

3.2Writing at a Computer
 Most people do all their own typing and word processing—a dramatic change from
just a decade or two ago, and nowadays the old approaches to thesis writing (which
included use of professional typists and a great deal of writing by hand) are almost
forgotten. All students are familiar with the challenges of using a word processor to
produce a well-written short work such as an essay. They are also familiar with the
modes of writing that computers encourage: frequent revision, writing of sections
in any order (or of several sections at the same time), ease of change of style and
layout, and so on. The use of word processing has become universal, profoundly
affecting the way research can be carried out and reported.
However, the task of writing an extended document such as a thesis is a very
different process to that of writing a shorter work. Many students know the elementary features of word processors that are sufficient for a 3,000-word essay, but not
the more advanced features that help authors to maintain consistency of style and
presentation over 50,000 words or more, a scale on which manual checking can
become painfully laborious and where it is essential to have automatic maintenance
of elements such as section and figure numbers. Likewise, good presentation requires software that automatically maintains bibliographies; mechanisms that create indexes and tables of contents; tools for professional-looking illustrations; and
strategies for keeping versions and back-ups.
On the other hand, some students tend to over-rely on some of the functions of
word processors, such as grammar and spelling checkers, which may be designed
for general writing rather than the demands of communication within a specific academic community. Learning to make effective, appropriate use of a word processor
is a key step towards timely completion of your thesis, and it is a mistake to assume

3.3Mechanics of Writing
 that even long familiarity with a particular word processor means that you are using
it well as a research tool (or that it is the right choice for your new activity).
Today, the most widely used general-purpose word processor is Microsoft Word,
or the OpenOffice equivalent; in the mathematical and physical sciences many researchers use the more technically oriented markup-based LaTeX. I do not explore
the specifics of these word processors, but encourage you to use resources such as
advanced guides and manuals to ensure that you are using them well—even an occasional revisit to an online tutorial can be surprisingly rewarding.
A typical word processor can be viewed as a suite of separate tools, perhaps
bundled together under a common user interface. These tools might include an editor, for entering and modifying text; spelling and grammar checkers; a bibliography
database; a line-art environment; and a system for laying out the text in a form suitable for printing or for viewing online. This last point is particularly important: a
word processor allows the style of a document to be separated from its content, and
the two issues are important at different stages of the thesis creation process.

3.4Presentation
 The fine details of the style of your thesis may not become settled until it is almost
finished, and I strongly encourage that, in the early stages at least, your focus is on
creation of content rather than on how it appears on the page. Nonetheless, right from
the start you need to write within the constraints of a style—for example, so that all
headings of the same kind, such as chapter titles, are displayed in the same way.
Which format do you adopt? In principle, you have great latitude in your choices,
so long as you are consistent in what you do. In practice, however, you should adopt
a thesis style that is already in use in your department, and it may well be that your
supervisor has specific requirements. You should also be aware of field-specific
guidelines, such as those published by the American Psychological Association.
That said, some standard styles are less than eye-pleasing, and you may want to refine the appearance. The key thing is that you use a style from the start, so that you
can easily change the appearance of the whole thesis if you want to do so.
Pay particular attention to the way you cite references, both in-text and in the
bibliography or reference section of your thesis. Your professional handling of references is one way that examiners assess your readiness to enter the community
of scholars. If you are sloppy, or maintain incomplete lists, or perhaps fail to cite a
work, it signals that are you not respecting colleagues. Quite apart from the inherent importance of this, you will annoy an examiner if you cite material and fail to
list it. One way an examiner checks to see whether you know what you are talking
about is to check the references as you cite them. Conversely, you shouldn’t put
references in your list of references unless you have cited them. So all of these have
to be checked, one by one. Read your own text the way that the examiner would,
checking the list every time you come to a citation. My advice is to be systematic
when you are collecting the reference material in the first place, and remain aware
of the importance of correct citations throughout your professional career.
Using a style means that, once you have established a pattern, you can easily
stick to it and the reader will get the same message every time. For example, main
section headings, wherever they appear in your document, will always be in the
same typeface (font) and of the same size. They should always be preceded by the
same space separation from preceding text, and always be followed by the same
space separation. If the style you choose is clearly different from that of other headings, the reader will quickly understand ‘We are starting a new main section’ or
‘This is a sub-section within the section’. This is especially true if you use a style
that is familiar to most readers in the field.
A thesis consists of several different parts that need to be tied together with a set
of conventions. Without a standard format across the entire document, the work will
appear random and unprofessional. For example, you should put all chapter headings on a new page, using the same style; that is, the same font and paragraphing.
You should give all major section headings a style that is different from that of the
chapter headings. Captions to figures should all have the same style, but be different
again from section headings and different from the main text. All new paragraphs
should begin with the same indentation (except for the first paragraph after a heading, which may have no indent at all), and so on. All this will help your readers to
navigate their way through your thesis. This styling is provided with templates,
which govern the appearance and numbering of every element of a document.
Before you start writing your report or thesis, you should think about its format
and devise styles and formatting rules that are appropriate for your field of study.
Begin as you mean to continue. Introduce rules as necessary, and be aware that too
much complexity can work against you. For example, avoid deep structures—is it
really necessary to have paragraphs with numbers like 3.1.2.1a(iii)? Once you have
a style, any element of the document can be put in that format, and you are on your
way to producing a professional-looking thesis. While you may have had little previous exposure to creation or use of styles, in my view templates are the single most
important feature of a word processor, and you must learn how to use them properly.
After creating a style, you can generate a thesis structure, with a few empty
chapters and perhaps some subheadings and so on. You can then use the style to
generate a table of contents, and begin to get a sense of how the final thesis will appear. As you proceed, you will use the table of contents, or other outline tools, to get
a sense of the current structure of the thesis and where it may need revision—extra
chapters, moving of material from one section to the next, changing how headings
relate to each other in the hierarchy, and so on.

3.5Writing Tools
 Most word-processing programs include a facility for checking spelling. It checks
every word you have typed against a dictionary built into the program. Do not ignore it!1
Few people are infallible spellers or proofreaders and it is only rational to
It’s been argued that spell-checkers make authors lazy, and that writers at any level with access to
a spell-checker make more mistakes than those without. I suspect that this is a case where average
have oddities questioned. However, although the spell-check is good at picking up
typographical errors, it can’t make decisions for you. Typical problems are proper
names (people’s names or place names), and words for which there are alternative spellings. In the case of proper names, the temptation is to tell the program to
ignore its questionings, and go instead to the next area of doubt. This is a mistake:
you should check any proper name the first time the spell-check comes to it and,
when you are satisfied that you have got it right, add it to the dictionary. The second
problem is words for which alternative spellings are permissible ( -or or -our and
-ize or -ise are the most common). The most important constraint here is that you
be consistent. Before you start, determine your preferred spellings for these words,
and keep to them.On a related note, don’t rely on the spell-check to proofread for you; although it
will pick up misspelt words, it won’t distinguish between, for example, there and
their, or affect and effect. Similarly, it won’t tell you if you have left a word out.
Grammar-checkers look at every sentence, and make checks such as: Does it
contain a verb?; Is it missing connecting words?; Does the subject agree with the
verb (plural subjects must not have singular verbs)?; Is the verb in the passive voice
(permissible, but should be used sparingly)?; Are stock phrases being used (examples: ‘over and above’; ‘in order to’, ‘part and parcel’)?; and so on. You may think
that your English is better than that of the grammar checker—and some of the time
you will be right—but my experience is that they are often useful, and it is essential
to use a grammar-checker at least once before finalizing your thesis.

3.6References
 The name and year (or Harvard) system is the most popular reference style for
theses. It works well for readers, because it names references in an understandable
way, and also works grammatically. We can write for example ‘Rami and Tuntara
(2002) found little evidence of …’ or ‘… there was little evidence (Rami and Tuntara 2002)’. There are many alternatives, but the Harvard style is simple and effective.
Another form of referencing is the numbered note, or footnote, system, which is
used in many books. Such notes are usually collected at the end of each page. When
the page is printed out you will see the superscript number in the main text and the
footnote text at the bottom of the page, separated from the main text by a dividing
line. If you have more than one reference number on the page, the footnotes are all
collected automatically on that page, or instead the notes can be collected at the end
of a chapter or in a consolidated listing at the end of your thesis. Note that tools
for maintenance of references provide mechanisms for changing from one style to
behaviour is meaningless—for some people it is an essential tool, while for others it is little more
than a distraction. However, spell-checkers are at best a partial solution, and do not allow an author
to avoid the task of a thorough proofread.