Chapter 1
1.1Healthy Weight Loss Stories
 I started the George Mateljan Foundation ten years ago with one
aim in mind—to help people discover the World’s Healthiest Foods,
so they could enjoy better health. This goal guided the creation of
our World’s Healthiest Foods website (www.WHFoods.org) and The
World’s Healthiest Foods book.
During the past 10 years, I have been delighted to receive thousands
of letters of gratitude from Readers, who have taken the time to
share with me how eating the World’s Healthiest Foods has changed
their lives. They have written to tell me that they have experienced
greater energy, better sleep, more lustrous hair, clearer skin, enhanced
concentration and memory, and many other signs of overall vitality.
Others have also shared that eating the World’s Healthiest Foods has
helped their cholesterol to drop, their blood pressure to normalize,
their blood sugar levels to stabilize, and their headaches to dissipate.
Over the years, Readers have shared with me how much they have
learned from the WHFoods website and The World’s Healthiest
Foods book. Yet, this learning is definitely a two-way street: as
Readers have learned from us, we have also learned so much from
them. One of the discoveries that I find most exciting has been the
recognition of yet another incredibly positive benefit of the World’s
Healthiest Foods:
Enjoying the World's Healthiest Foods is the perfect way to
lose excess weight and maintain a healthful weight without
dieting.Here are just a few of the inspiring stories I’ve received from
Readers telling me about their experiences:
One benefit I've discovered from eating high-fiber, nutrient-rich
World's Healthiest Foods is that I'm losing about 2 pounds per week
without any change in my exercise habits. I don't feel deprived
because I don't consider myself to be "on a diet." Thank you again
for your outstanding website. Eating the right foods has changed
my entire outlook on life. - Mike
The two weeks we have been on your program has proved not only
to be nutritious but extremely tasty. Members of my household are
for the first time eating fish and not complaining. My partner has
lost half a stone in two weeks so would just like to say a very big
thank you. - Lara
The World’s Healthiest Foods are possibly the cure to the American
problem of obesity. From my own experience, I decided to change
my way of eating in the New Year. I was obese—at 5’8.” I was 240
pounds. Now six months later, I have lost 32 pounds and am still
losing. I feel and look a lot better. - Astrida
Because of your great website, WHFoods, you have helped change
my health for the better. I went from 24% body fat to 13% body fat.
Thanks again for your generous knowledge. - GVU
Through diet and exercise I lost 170 pounds. I have your list of the
World's Healthiest Foods on my refrigerator. - Mark 

1.2Healthy Weight Loss and Improved Health
 While excess weight in and of itself may be cosmetically undesirable,its most serious harmful effects result from the fact that excess fat,
particularly around the mid-section, greatly increases risk of developing
a myriad of other health conditions, including high cholesterol, high
blood pressure, and elevated blood sugar levels. Many Readers have reported that eating World’s Healthiest Foods not only helped them lose
weight, but also alleviated weight-related health problems as well:
By using some of the guides, recipes, and tips from WHFoods, I've
lost 40 pounds. I feel better and my thinking is more clear. I had
high blood pressure but that went away when I lost the weight.
- Kmuzu
Since I started eating the World’s Healthiest Foods, my blood sugar
has stabilized, and I have lost 50 pounds! I have truly turned my
life around. - Cindy
I changed the way I ate, and I have the World's Healthiest Foods to
thank. I have lost over 75 pounds. My blood pressure medication is
gone. I didn't count calories and I didn’t even care about portion
control. - Mary
With your help, I have lost 80 pounds; my cholesterol was 280 and
is now down to 170! - KC
Thank you so very much for your food information. I have been
religiously following your advice for about two years. I've lost 100
pounds. You literally don't have time to read my long litany of health
improvements, but they range from dramatically improved mood to
amazing night vision. - BI 

1.3Healthy Weight Loss and Increased Energy Levels
 Many readers commented that the key to losing weight was forgetting
about counting calories and focusing instead on eating more of the
World's Healthiest Foods. Readers told us that these foods not only
helped them feel more vibrant and energetic, but they successfully
lost weight without feeling deprived or sacrificing anything—including enjoyment—in the process:
I’ve been researching and preparing meals based on WHFoods.org
for the past month. I feel far more alive, alert, enlightened, and
energized. I now experience greater degrees of balance, equilibrium,
and sound sleep and no more mood swings. - Michelle
I have lost weight while I eat more. I have also found more energy
and strength. And for that reason, I wish to thank you very much.
Mitch
It has been nearly six months since I began changing over to the
World's Healthiest Foods, and I am pleasantly surprised at my increase in energy, the loss of dress sizes, and the overall feeling of
good health. I find that my refrigerator is not filled with "empty
calories" and that I can always have great snacks and healthy delicious food to eat. - Terri
Thank you!!! I just needed to thank you for changing my life. This
information has created a better, healthier, and more energetic me.
I have lost close to 30 pounds by changing my way of eating. I was
a terrible fast-food, processed-food eater, never drank water or ate
any kind of fruit; now I think I would die without those things. Just
the thought of fast foods makes me sick. I just couldn't let this
change in my life go without thanking you so much for helping me.
DL

1.4Healthy Weight Loss and the Healthiest Way of Cooking
 I have spent years developing cooking methods and recipes to make
the World's Healthiest Foods taste great because no matter how
nutritious your food, you won't enjoy it, and won’t keep eating it, if
it doesn't taste good. Readers have written us about how much they
love our easy-to-prepare recipes using our Healthiest Way of Cooking
methods:
I started using the Healthy Sauté method of preparing food. I am a
65-year-old male who now weighs 172 pounds. I began at 245
pounds. I only use fresh veggies, fruits, etc. and the Healthy Sauté
method for cooking. I do grill and eat meat/fish in moderation. I
want to thank you so much for changing my life. I have maintained
my current weight for 6 months and increased my exercise regimen
from swimming to a full gym program. Food now is so important to
me because you have been there to help people like me. Keep up the
good work. I love the recipes. I have discovered so much. - DD
With your assistance I have lost 17 pounds, which previously
seemed impossible. Your recipes taste so good—easy and fast, which
is what we all need. I have purchased your book for my mother sister and two friends. I share your daily recipes with my co-workers
who also want your book. Thanks so much for providing all of us so
much help. - Cheryl
I bought George's book, The World's Healthiest Foods, in January
and began to look at how I ate, what I ate, how much I ate. After less
than four months, I found my weight down almost 20 pounds; my
husband (who had not meant to go on a diet, but whose cook is,
yes, me) had lost seven pounds as well. My energy level has increased
as well, and the level of fruit and veggie intake has increased
dramatically. Salads became an adventure, and the use of nuts and
spices added zest to the foods. - Ann
Your Plan meets all of my requirements for becoming healthy: simple
prep time, quick and easy cooking methods, and gourmet tasting
meals every time! I've lost over thirty pounds in three and one-half
months. I have more energy than I can use, and better skin than I
ever would have thought possible. The World's Healthiest Foods are
truly the best guide for those of us who want to pursue health while
having time to enjoy life outside of the kitchen. - Rosemary
I am loving this site, and my interest in whole foods and preparing
(with your methods of course) my meals has never been like this.
BI
The style of cooking you have perfected makes food preparation so
easy and the outcome so richly flavorful. - Marie

1.5What is the Secret of Healthy Weight Loss?
 So, by now you must be wondering, “What is it about the World’s
Healthiest Foods that made them so effective in producing healthy
lasting weight loss, vibrant health, and energy for the Readers who
shared their success stories?”
It’s simple, actually. The World’s Healthiest Foods are nutrient-rich
foods. I believe that this is the secret of why the Readers were losing
weight –the wide range and quantity of nutrients these foods deliver
for the small amount of calories that they contain (what I refer to as
“nutrient-richness”).
Nutrient-Rich World’s Healthiest Foods = Maximum Nutrients
Minimal Calories
The classification of a food as nutrient-rich reflects its ability to
provide a wealth of nutrients (vitamins, minerals, phytonutrients,
antioxidants, fiber, protein, omega-3 fatty acids, and other health promoting compounds) for a minimal amount of calories. In sharp
contrast, nutrient-poor foods are ones that provide a small number
of nutrients, but a large number of calories; these include processed,
refined, and fast foods.
So by enjoying their meals composed of nutrient-rich World's
Healthiest Foods, it was much easier for Readers to get all of the
nutrients their bodies required for vital health and energy without
exceeding the amount of calories that their bodies needed to maintain
optimal weight. And, at the same time, they were satisfying their
appetite and taste buds. For this reason, when they relied on the
World’s Healthiest Foods, they lost weight naturally, effortlessly,
and surprisingly quickly—a winning combination. These foods are
nutritional bargains; they provide an abundance of health-promoting
nutrients without a lot of calories.
The World’s Healthiest Foods are whole foods that contain all of the
nutrients that nature provides to ensure the health and life of plants
and animals. When we eat nutrient-rich World's Healthiest Foods,
especially when they are organically grown, we enjoy the protective
qualities nature has supplied; nothing is contained in these foods
that doesn’t need to be there. Because the World’s Healthiest Foods
provide what is essential and leave out what it unnecessary, they are
custom-tailored for weight management. And the more you eat them,
the better they will taste. Nutrient-rich World's Healthiest Foods are
the new force for change—they can make a healthier and slimmer you. 

1.6Why the Nutrient-Rich World’s Healthiest Foods Promote Healthy Weight Loss
 What is it about nutrient-richness that helps promote weight loss?
Several factors are involved. Nutrient-rich foods provide our body
with outstanding nutrient support that enables our body to carry out
its metabolic activities in an optimal way. Metabolic activities, such
as the burning of unwanted fat (a process called beta-oxidation), are
best supported by a diet that is rich in nutrients.Nutrient-richness also means that we provide our body with ample
nutrients at a minimal calorie cost. (Many researchers use the term
“nutrient density” to describe this special dietary combination of
high-nutrients plus low-calories.) It’s helpful to think about nutrientrichness by comparing it to its dietary opposite. Imagine a person
whose diet is largely composed of nutrient-poor highly processed
fatty foods and fast food, i.e, extremely low-quality food containing
very few nutrients. If that person consumes enough food, he or she
will eventually obtain a supply of some nutrients; however, many
vitamins and minerals necessary for a healthy metabolism—as well
as most recently discovered antioxidants and phytonutrients abundant
in plant foods that research is now showing to play important roles
in maintaining a healthy weight—will be virtually absent.
In addition, how many calories of low nutrient-density food will it
take to get even some nutrient basics? With very low-quality foods,
if a person eats somewhere around 6,000 or 7,000 calories’ worth of
food, he or she will probably get an adequate supply of basic nutrients.
But the caloric cost will be far too high. Body fat and weight gain
will increase from excessive calorie consumption.
In contrast, the use of low-calorie foods to increase food volume
and the use of nutrient-rich World’s Healthiest Foods to support
metabolism are core research principles in the science of weight
loss. When your weight loss strategy centers around low-calorie and
nutrient-rich World’s Healthiest Foods, the research odds are
strongly in your favor for weight loss success. And this is not difficult
to do; in fact, I will show you how to get most of the nutrients you
need in the Healthy Weight Loss Eating Plan (page 91) and spend
less than 1600 calories. 

1.7New Paradigm in Weight Loss
 Most weight loss plans require you to follow some new type of diet
for the first time in your life. These weight loss plans depend upon
a certain amount of novelty. They are betting that you’ve never eaten
this way before (and chances are, you will never eat this way
again!). They are also assuming that you aren’t familiar with the
“special twists” in their theory of weight loss. They give you a diet
that includes these special twists in the hope that you’ll find it new
and interesting enough to make you willing to put up with whatever
unbalanced regimen is prescribed through a period of initial weight
loss. Then you get bored, go back to the way of eating that put on
those pounds in the first place, and gain it all back – just in time for
the next weight loss novelty book to hit the market. As I present in
this book, the World’s Healthiest Foods as the key to Healthy Weight
Loss is different.
The World's Healthiest Foods aren’t part of a diet relying on some
new gimmick to be followed on a temporary basis. These foods are
part of the everyday eating habits that will make you lean and
healthy. Our focus is a package of nutrient-rich World’s Healthiest
Foods and very quick-and-easy recipes and menu suggestions. The
basis of Healthy Weight Loss –Without Dieting is simply enjoying a
cornucopia of World’s Healthiest Foods prepared using the Healthiest
Way of Cooking Methods, which enhance flavor while preserving
nutrients. It’s not a diet; it’s a way of eating that serves up a delicious,
potently healthy way of life.
Our new paradigm parts company with the catchy fad diets that ask
you to follow unusual food rules or dietary restrictions. Our new
paradigm insists that the “tried-and-true” principles of healthy eating
can be followed at all times in life, including those times when you
most desperately want to lose weight! These basic rules include a focus on:
Nutrient-rich foods like the World’s Healthiest Foods that give you the largest number of nutrients for the smallest
number of calories.Simple, quick, cooking practices that preserve as much of
a food’s natural constituents as possible.And, just as important, that magical kind of pleasure that
comes from the delicious tastes and textures of real food.


Chapter 2 
2.1Why Nutrient-Richness Can Help You Lose Weight
 Readers wrote to tell me that when they shifted their meals to include
more of the World’s Healthiest Foods, they not only experienced
enhanced health, but—without even trying—those who wanted to
lose weight found that they were readily doing so. The research we
did helped us to more clearly understand why Readers lost weight
and why the World’s Healthiest Foods were so effective in weight
loss.
And now let me explain why it can work for you. The reason these
foods are so beneficial is that they are concentrated sources of a vast
array of health-promoting nutrients. Nutrient-richness is the term I
use to describe this remarkable feature of the World’s Healthiest
Foods. I want to explain more about the benefits of this key criterion
of the World’s Healthiest Foods, so you can fully understand why
it’s so important.
Nutrient-richness is a measurement of the concentration of nutrients
a food can deliver in exchange for the amount of calories it contains.
On the World’s Healthiest Foods website (www.WHFoods.org) and
in my book, The World’s Healthiest Foods, nutrient-richness is
shown both qualitatively (a food may be defined as a good, very
good, or excellent source of a particular nutrient) and quantitatively
(the numerical scores that a food achieves in association with each
particular nutrient).
Since we only have a limited amount of calories that we can consume
if we want to lose weight or maintain our weight while simultaneously
taking in a sufficient range and amount of nutrients to maintain our
health, it is essential for us to get as many nutrients as possible in comparison to the number 
of calories we consume. Fortunately, it’s easy to do this by focusing on the nutrient-rich World’s Healthiest Foods.
The latest scientific research clearly shows that successful weight
loss requires that we eat nutrient-rich foods. In large, nationwide
studies that have included both healthy-weight and overweight
participants, insufficient intake of vitamins and minerals has been
consistently linked to higher body weights. Eating few fresh
vegetables and fruits leads not only to inadequate nourishment, but
has also been linked to weight problems. In studies of overweight
children attempting to lose weight, increased consumption of nutrientrich vegetables has also been associated with better weight loss
success.
New evidence associates diets high in salads, vegetables, and fruits
and low in processed and refined foods with healthy weight because
they contain phytonutrients—beneficial compounds found exclusively
in fruits and vegetables that possess the power to help keep us
healthy and help the body maintain an optimal, healthy weight. Also
salads, vegetables, and fruits are rich in antioxidants, which we need
if we want to lose weight. Studies show that overweight individuals
have higher levels of oxidative stress from an excess of free radicals
and lack of antioxidants. 

2.2The Nutrients We Need Each Day
 Each day, we need hundreds of nutrients to stay healthy, and these
nutrients must be supplied by the food we eat.
The following chart will give you a sense of the variety of some of
the nutrients we must get each day from our food if we wish to
experience a healthy weight and optimal health. Please note that this
chart is by no means comprehensive; it doesn’t show you all of the
nutrients you need.
For example, phytonutrients—plant nutrients such as carotenoids
(beta carotene, lutein, zeaxanthan) and flavonoids (anthocyanins,
catechins, quercetin)—are now known to be essential to health, but
while researchers have identified approximately 10,000 phytonutrients, they estimate at least 40,000 phyonutrients may eventually
be catalogued.
Even though they have yet to be named or identified in the laboratory, these phytonutrients are still very much present—in nutrientrich foods, like the World’s Healthiest Foods. In fact, that is the only
place you can currently get them! They cannot, for example, be
obtained from dietary supplements because they have not yet been
isolated from the whole, natural foods that contain them. Nor are
they available in highly processed “fast” foods.
The following chart contains some well-established and wellresearched nutrients that are included in the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration’s “Reference Values for Nutrition Labeling.” Next
to each nutrient you’ll see the Daily Value (DV) that was established
as part of the FDA’s labeling program. Please note that this DV value
is a population-based goal and may not reflect the exact amount of
the nutrient that would be best for you (for this information you should
seek the advice of a nutrition-oriented healthcare practitioner). Yet,
these Daily Values can give you a sense of general nutrient intake
goals and emphasize how nutrient-rich World’s Healthiest Foods can
provide you with outstanding benefits in terms of Daily Values. 

2.3Fresh Fruits, Salads, and Vegetables are Among the Most Nutrient-Rich Foods
 It’s clear that nutrient-richness is a key to maintaining health and
losing weight healthfully. And what are among the most nutrientrich foods that people can easily incorporate into their Healthiest
Way of Eating to help them boost their well-being? Fresh fruits,
salads, and vegetables.
Yet, which foods do most of us not eat enough of? Fresh fruits, salads,
and vegetables.
In fact, 80% of Americans are compromising their ability to maintain
a healthy weight and endangering their health by failing to eat
enough fresh fruits, salads, and vegetables. I find this to be of great
concern. It’s quite straightforward: the more fruits, salads, and
vegetables, the easier it will be for you to get the nutrients you
need for optimal health at a “caloric cost” so low that you will
easily lose excess weight. I strongly believe that Americans’ seeming
aversion to whole fruits, salads, and vegetables is one of the major
causes of the obesity epidemic in this country (and, in the Healthy Weight Loss Eating Plan, I will show you how to make these foods
taste good so that you will truly enjoy them).
My approach to healthy weight loss emphasizes fresh fruits, salads,
and vegetables—the lowest calorie food group available on the
planet. On the WHFoods.org website and The World’s Healthiest
Foods book, we profile more than two dozen low-calorie vegetables
and over twenty fruits. With easy-to-prepare recipes and menus—
which rely on low-calorie, deliciously prepared fresh fruits, salads,
and vegetables—I will help you to have 5-9 recommended servings
every day. Based on the weight loss research, these foods are your
best option for increasing food volume and enjoying tasty, satisfying
meals while keeping your overall calories low. 

2.4Nutrient-Rich Food Illustrations
 Spinach
To further explain the unique qualities of nutrient-rich World’s
Healthiest Foods, and to clearly illustrate how important they are to
health and healthy weight loss, I want to share with you some food
comparisons. Following is a chart showing the contributions of
nutrients, including the % Daily Value (DV) of 22 nutrients of which
spinach is an especially concentrated source.One cup cooked spinach 41 calories
Nutrient %DV
Vitamin K 1111
Vitamin A 377
Manganese 84
Folate 66
Magnesium 39
Iron 36
Vitamin C 29
Vitamin B2 (Riboflavin) 25
Calcium 25
Potassium 24
Vitamin B6 (Pyridoxine) 22
Tryptophan 22
Vitamin E 19
Dietary Fiber 17
Copper 16
Vitamin B1 (Thiamin) 11
Protein 11
Phosphorus 10
Zinc 9
Omega-3 Fatty Acids 6
Vitamin B3 (Niacin) 4
Selenium 4 
As you can see, one cup of cooked spinach contains only 41 calories.
That’s 2.3% of the calories that would be included in a 1,800-calorie
diet. Yet, for just over 2% of your daily calories, you get between 10%
and 100% of the Daily Value for 16 nutrients! In addition to these
remarkable benefits for these nutrients, this one-cup serving of
spinach lets you exceed (by leaps and bounds) your daily intake goals
for vitamin K (1111%) and pro-vitamin A (295%). All of these
amazing benefits and you still have about 1,760 calories left to enjoy and “use” to get more nutrients! That’s almost 98% of your day’s
calories left to enjoy after meeting such important nutritional goals on
your path to vibrant health, increased energy, and healthy weight loss.


Chapter 3
3.1Why Nutrient-Rich World’s Healthiest Foods are the Key to Health and Healthy Weight Loss
 Nutrients are the Body’s Ingredients for Health
In this chapter, I am going to review why the nutrients, in which the
World’s Healthiest Foods are so concentrated, are essential to your
health. You’ll see how they provide so many great benefits and are
therefore the key to healthy weight loss and optimal health.
Even though most everyone is familiar with the idea of nutrition and
nutrients, many people do not really know what nutrients actually do
and how they work, including how they contribute to weight loss. I
want to tell you what nutrients do by starting out with the simple
example of calcium.
You’ve no doubt heard that calcium is important for the health of
your bones. And you may also have heard that osteoporosis—a bone
problem that affects 20 million adults in the U.S.—can be “prevented
by calcium.”
I wish things were this simple! But unfortunately, they are not. Even
though calcium plays a pivotal role in maintaining our bone health,
it’s just not true that calcium, all by itself, can prevent the occurrence of osteoporosis.
First of all, there are many more nutrients that bones need to build
their structure and density. For example, for good bone health you need magnesium, manganese, zinc, vitamin D, vitamin C, vitamin K,
boron, silicon, potassium, and a variety of other nutrients. Just
focusing on calcium won’t allow you to achieve the goal of good bone
health. You need a much broader list of nutrients that can only be provided by nutrient-rich foods like the World’s Healthiest Foods.
Most people are used to thinking about nutrients in a “this cures
that” type of way. This way of thinking is sometimes encouraged
by the overly simplified positioning of dietary supplements in the
marketplace. Manufacturers often include health claims on their
product labels that present relatively simple cause-effect relationships
between nutrients and health. For example, a supplement manufacturer might claim that calcium builds strong bones, or that fiber
maintains bowel regularity, or that vitamin E supports heart health.
While all of these connections between nutrients and health have
science-based validity, consumers might end up concluding that all
they need for a healthy heart is vitamin E, or that nothing more is
needed for building strong bones than calcium. The truth of the
matter is that no single nutrient is a magic bullet that can singlehandedly prevent a disease or protect an entire body system like
blood vessels or bones.
It’s not as if a nutrient waves a magic want and voila…a health
problem is fixed. The reason that nutrients are related to the
prevention of future health problems and the improvement of existing
ones is connected to the role that nutrients play in all of the body’s
underlying structures and metabolic activities. They are the resources
that our body needs to make and maintain healthy cells. They are the
substances that help run our metabolism and allow our body to go
about its moment-by-moment physiologic activities. Without them,
our body cannot do the things it needs to do: for example, our cells
can’t communicate, our muscles can’t contract, and oxygen can’t
be carried in our blood. Those three activities are joined by literally
thousands of other activities that go on every second at a metabolic
level that is invisible to us but absolutely critical to our health.
Nutrients, therefore, are the ingredients in the body’s recipe for supporting its underlying structure and function, which serve as the
foundation for our physical health.
You can get a glimpse of this massive underlying health foundation
if you take any single nutrient and look at everything it does in the
body. As an example, let’s take magnesium.
Magnesium is a co-factor in over 300 different enzymatic reactions.
These include many steps in the energy production cycle as well as
the synthesis of our DNA. Magnesium is also an important component
in bone structure and plays an important role in cell-to-cell communication, especially that involving our nerve and muscle cells.
Without adequate amounts of magnesium, our bodies wouldn’t be
able to function properly, which can first lead to lowered energy and
then potentially progress to a variety of different signs, symptoms,
and health conditions when things aren’t working well. As you can
also see, it’s more complicated than simply saying that the role of
magnesium is to promote heart health or bone health, two claims
that are often associated with this mineral. Magnesium, like all other
nutrients, is needed in hundreds of different ways for support of our
underlying metabolic processes, and it is these underlying processes
that serve as the true foundation for our overall physical health.
You might think that this more comprehensive and holistic view of
health and nutrients would make nourishment more complicated.
But it’s actually the opposite! The true role of nutrients in your
health actually makes things much simpler.
That’s because the World’s Healthiest Foods are comprehensive and
holistic as well! If you consider the World’s Healthiest Foods as a
group, you will discover that their nutrients support every aspect of
our metabolic and cellular needs. Not only do they maintain this
massive underlying biochemical structure that supports all of our
health, but they do so in an optimal way by combining nutrients in
their most natural patterns. No supplement will ever be able to
achieve this amazing level of synergy between nutrients! All you have to do is focus on enjoying the World’s Healthiest Foods since
their nutrient-richness and natural synergy of nutrients will do the
rest of the work for you. 

3.2Why Health and Healthy Weight Becomes Challenged When You Don’t Get Enough Nutrient-Rich World’s Healthiest Foods
 The modern American diet is often criticized as being a diet that is
prone to excess. Too many fats, too many sweets, too much fried
food, too much salt, too much meat, and too many calories! Many
health analysts think about obesity in precisely this way—as a problem
resulting from excess and overconsumption.
Yet the opposite side of the equation when it comes to health and
maintaining a healthy weight—the side involving underconsumption
and nutrient deficiency—is equally true. The American diet is just
as much one of deficiency and undernourishment. The average U.S.
adult consumes a daily diet that fails to provide 100% of the Dietary
Reference Intake (DRI) level for:
vitamin A
vitamin K
choline
It also provides less than 50% of the DRI for:
vitamin D
folate
calcium
magnesium
selenium
fiber
the omega-3 fatty acid, EPA (eicosapentaenoic acid)
the omega-3 fatty acid, DHA (docosahexaenoic acid)
What happens when we get this low in our nutrient intake? If it’s only
for a few days, usually nothing. When we are healthy, our bodies have
nutrient reserves that they can draw upon to meet our nutritional needs.
But if we are low in nutrients week after week, month after month, this
nutrient deficiency can start us off on the road to chronic disease and unhealthy weight gain. Developing a serious illness as a result of
nutrient deficiency is not a quick or immediately visible process.
In the past, we have tended to think about nutrient deficiency
conditions as involving the total absence of a single nutrient and
fairly rapid appearance of unusual symptoms. The disease called
scurvy that gets triggered by vitamin C deficiency is a good example.
This condition, which is readily visible in the form of damage to
gums of the mouth, was originally seen in sailors in the middle of
long voyages without the benefit of fruits and vegetables on board.
In this situation, there is a fairly fast-developing and direct relationship
between a single nutrient deficiency (vitamin C) and a very unique
set of symptoms (damage to the gums).
Today’s nutrient deficiency diseases do not fit into this scurvy type
of pattern. Today, it is not one single nutrient that has fallen below
the recommended intake level. It is more like a dozen nutrients as we
consume all of them in amounts that fall far below the amounts we
need. Over a period of time involving several years, we may still not
see any visible signs of disease related to these nutrient deficiencies.
Instead, we may only feel like we’re tired more often than we should
be. Or that we don’t sleep as soundly as we should, or don’t feel well
rested upon waking. Or that we are fatigued and can’t concentrate well.
Our chronic nutrient deficiency is definitely leading us in the direction
of more serious health problems, even though we may have yet to see
any visible evidence of these problems.
Underneath the surface, at a cellular level, long-term nutrient deficiency
changes the way our body functions. Virtually all body functions
require unique combinations of nutrients. We cannot keep our cell
membranes intact without the help of vitamin E. We cannot protect
the structures inside the cell from oxygen-related damage without
the help of copper, zinc, and selenium. Inside the energy-producing
mitochondria in our cells, manganese is essential. Our muscles cannot
use carbohydrates for fuel without a specific mixture of B-complex
vitamins. Chronic nutrient deficiency disrupts all of these processes.
They don’t altogether cease, but rather continue to operate in a sub-optimal way. Over time, what starts out as sub-optimal progresses
onward to fully problematic. 


Chapter 4
4.1World’s Healthiest Foods Help You Manage Adverse Food Reactions 
 Adverse food reactions (what people may call “food allergies”) can
cause numerous symptoms and can be the underlying reason for
challenges to optimal health. These negative reactions to specific
foods are more common than you might expect, and they can be
surprisingly difficult to pinpoint as contributing factors to health
problems. Adverse food reactions can include food allergies that
start in early childhood and continue on throughout life. They can
also involve more temporary reactions to food that occur when you
are feeling particularly low in energy and when your physical health
is especially compromised. But in either case, you will not always
have an easy-to-spot symptom that tells you, “Aha! My body is
having a problem with something I ate.” In the case of adverse food
reactions, it’s much more likely that you will feel bad in some way
(i.e., fatigued, irritable, depressed, foggy headed, lethargic) that
could involve dozens of causes. All of the above symptoms, for
example, could be caused by lack of sleep, or chronic stress, or a
long list of psychological factors.
When we have adverse food reactions, we might be reacting to several
different food components. It could be some unique food proteins
that are triggering our problematic reactions. It could also be the
presence of sugars in food that we lack the enzymes to digest properly.
We might also react to food additives and preservatives, or to pesticides
or other food contaminants.
Regardless of the food component that is triggering an adverse reaction, you almost always feel better if you can eliminate the food
from your meal plan (or at least substantially cut back on your
consumption of the food). As you will see later in this chapter, this
process of avoiding potentially troublesome foods usually falls
under the heading of an “elimination diet.” Later in this chapter, I’ll
be telling you much more about the details of a modified elimination
diet that you can follow in your own meal planning as you pursue
weight loss and more vibrant health.
Adverse food reactions really boil down to a kind of mismatch
between a person and a food. You and I may just not be cut out to
eat anything and everything! If you and your food are mismatched,
you may have a more difficult time losing weight. Recent reviews
of popular weight loss diets clearly show that unusual diets—
mismatched not only to a person’s nutrient needs but also to a
person’s broader metabolic pattern—are unsupportive of weight loss
in comparison to balanced, metabolically matched diets. Although
adverse food reactions have not been specifically studied in this
regard, they are established as real-life responses to food that can
upset many different metabolic balances in a person’s body, and can
compromise function in several different body systems, including
the digestive system, immune system, nervous system, endocrine
system, and inflammatory system. If these body systems are not
working well, your path to healthy and optimal weight loss will be
compromised.
Two important examples of adverse food reactions—not specifically
linked to weight management problems but relatively high up on
most research lists of foods most likely to cause adverse reactions—
are dairy and wheat. Here’s a closer look at each of those foods and
their potential for adverse reactions.
In the case of dairy, as many as 15% of all U.S. infants show unwanted
reactions to cow’s milk, including common symptoms that can be
related to many other factors besides food. These symptoms include
irritableness, fussiness, upset stomach, and bowel problems like excessive gas, bloating, or diarrhea. When tested for food allergy,
however, as few as 5% of all infants actually test positive for cow’s
milk allergy. The frequency of dairy allergy in adults has been estimated in some studies to be similar to the frequency in children, and
in other studies to be somewhat lower. (As is the case for all food
allergies, we do not have very accurate data to estimate the number
of people actually affected.)
In the case of dairy, sometimes the adverse reaction is related to milk
sugar (lactose). Not all individuals have enough of the enzyme
lactase to break down milk sugar and allow it to digest properly.
Unfortunately, in the processed food world, milk sugar (lactose) is
often added to non-dairy foods for flavor, and the only way to avoid
it is to read the ingredient list on the package. Sliced deli meats,
powdered coffee creamers, and ready-to-eat baked goods are examples
of foods that can contain lactose. Many individuals also have allergic
reactions to special proteins in cow’s milk called caseins. Unfortunately, in the processed food world, these proteins are also frequently
found in a wide variety of foods in forms like calcium caseinate or
sodium caseinate. Hot dogs, deli meats, nutrition bars, and protein
powder drinks are examples of foods that can contain casein. Individuals who experience adverse reactions to dairy often feel like
their entirely dietary balance is affected. The consequences of
consuming dairy can detract too much from the satisfaction of
eating, or lead to confusion about the trustworthiness of the diet.
Under these circumstances, the challenges of weight management
often become more difficult.
In the case of wheat, there is even less conclusive research on adverse
food reactions than there is for dairy. But scientists continue to
investigate links between specific wheat proteins, including gliadin
proteins and lectins (especially WGA, or wheat germ agglutinin)
and their ability to cause adverse reactions. Much like the situation
for lactose and casein in dairy, wheat components find their way into
many types of processed foods, and it is possible to experience an
adverse reaction to wheat even if you do not eat foods like wheat.

4.2Elimination Diet
 I have seen that adverse food reactions can be a barrier to losing
weight. As such, when you embark on your Healthy Weight Loss, if
you find that after three weeks of focusing your diet on enjoying
the World’s Healthiest Foods you don’t lose any weight, you may
want to investigate whether adverse food reactions may be the
culprit.
What I would recommend in this situation is a modified elimination
diet. One of the best tools to use for this is to keep a journal. Write
down all the foods that eat each meal, and then when you reintroduce
eliminated foods, write down whether or not you notice experiencing
an adverse reaction to them.
I realize that you’ll need the help of a licensed healthcare practitioner
to diagnose or treat a food allergy, and that you will also need the
support of a healthcare practitioner to go on a full-fledged, nutritionally restrictive or nutritionally complicated elimination diet. (I
should also point out here that in the case of some full-blown
elimination diets, medical monitoring is important from a safety
standpoint.) But I am not talking about a full-blown elimination diet
in this situation. I am only talking about some practical steps you
can take to experiment with avoidance of foods that are most
commonly associated with adverse food reactions. The chart below
shows the foods that are less likely to be associated with these kinds
of problematic reactions.You’ll have to decide how comfortable you are restricting your food
intake to the above list. If you are worried about staying well-nourished on the above foods, you should consult with a healthcare practitioner rather than attempting these dietary changes on your own.
You aren’t likely to see many changes in your health or well-being
unless you stick with these food modifications for at least one week,
so you need to feel comfortable in sticking to this restricted meal
plan for that amount of time. At the end of one week, you will want
to start re-introducing old foods back into your meal plan. I recommend that you introduce only one food at a time, and that you wait
at least two days before re-introducing another food. I would also
recommend that you start with asparagus, avocados, beets, broccoli,
Brussels sprouts, cauliflower, cucumbers, blueberries, watermelon,
flaxseeds, and quinoa when starting this food re-introduction
process since they are not as commonly associated with adverse
food reactions as some of the other foods you might have eliminated
from your meal plan.After that, you will want to continue re-introducing other foods back
into your meal plan, on this same one-per-day basis and waiting at
least two days before you add the next food. While you are re-introducing the foods that you avoided during your week on the modified
elimination diet, try to notice any adverse reactions that you may
have. Try to pay special attention to any problems that prompted
you to experiment with food elimination in the first place. If these
problems return, it might be evidence that the newly re-introduced
food is not well-matched for your body’s metabolism and might be
worth avoiding in future meal planning.
If you do suspect any adverse reactions using this modified elimination
approach, you should definitely consider a consultation with a
nutritionist or other healthcare provider who has extensive experience
with food allergy. A more structured elimination-challenge diet
might also be important to consider. For more information on food
allergy and sensitivity, see page 719 of The World’s Healthiest Foods
book.


Chapter 5
5.1World’s Healthiest Foods Promote Energy Production
 We all want extra energy—usually at all times, but especially when
we think about losing weight. It’s common to experience a depletion
of energy when we change our food intake patterns or cut back on
our overall caloric intake. At these times, it’s more important than
ever for our food to give us that extra energy boost.
This is one reason why nutrient-rich World’s Healthiest Foods are so
beneficial—they help you feel energized while shedding pounds.
And it’s quite simple how it happens: the World’s Healthiest Foods
can help energize you by providing your body with ample amounts
of nutrients required by the body’s energy production systems.
It’s not just that they provide you with enough macronutrients
(carbohydrates, protein, fat) that serve as the starting place for the
production of energy. They also contain micronutrients (vitamins
and minerals) that help to release the energy and then recapture it
so it can be stored for later use when and where it’s most needed.
Capturing energy from the food you eat takes place in your cells.
Some of the most important energy production spots are very
small microstructures inside our cells called mitochondria. The
energy production process that takes place in our mitochondria is
a complicated process. To function properly it involves a variety of
enzymes that require many vital health-promoting nutrients—such
as vitamins B1, B2, B3, B5, and B6, lipoic acid, coenzyme Q, as
well as iron, magnesium, and sulfur. So, imagine the difference in
how much energy you’ll feel from eating nutrient-poor refined
foods as opposed to nutrient-rich whole foods such as fresh fruits, salads, and vegetables. These and other World’s Healthiest Foods
will definitely keep your energy systems supplied with the healthpromoting nutrients it needs to fuel your vitality.
Additionally, nutrient-rich World’s Healthiest Foods—especially
fruits and vegetables—contain phytonutrients that act as powerful
antioxidants. In addition to the many other benefits that these plantbased nutrients provide, they have the ability to support healthy energy
production. That’s because in the process of making energy, your
body also creates oxygen radicals that can damage the mitochondria’s energy centers as well as many cells and tissues, leading to
reduced and inefficient energy production. But, the phytonutrients
and other antioxidants (such as vitamin E) contained in nutrientrich World’s Healthiest Foods can act as protective sentries for your
cells, quenching oxygen radicals so that they can not do damage.


Chapter 6
6.1World’s Healthiest Foods Promote Optimal Metabolism
 Healthy weight loss involves the burning of body fat, while preserving
other tissue (such as muscle mass). While “fat burning” may sound
like a fairly simple process, it is anything but.
In chemical terms, “fat burning” means oxidation of fat. In order to
breakdown body fat and turn it into energy, many different enzymes
and nutrients are required. Directly involved in this process are the
vitamins B2 (riboflavin), B3 (niacin), and B5 (pantothenic acid).
Also involved are proteins, together with sulfur- and phosphoruscontaining molecules. If our food fails to provide us with an ample
supply of these fat-metabolizing nutrients, we are not going to burn
body fat in an optimal way. That’s why it’s so important to focus on
nutrient-rich World’s Healthiest Foods—for their concentration of
these and other nutrients—when looking to optimize healthy weight
loss.
There is also some preliminary research on the role of certain nutrients
to induce “thermogenesis” in brown fat cells. The World’s Healthiest
Foods—notably those that provide higher protein and lower refined
carbohydrates, as well as those rich in fiber—are integral to activating
the thermogenic production of heat in brown adipose (fat) cells. In
addition, they decrease storage of dietary fat in ordinary cells;
therefore, they may be helpful aspects to consider in the process of
weight loss or any aspect of weight management.
One of the foods (well, actually beverages) that I emphasize in the Healthy Weight Loss Eating Plan that has made headlines when it
comes to its role in healthy weight loss is green tea, which contains
major components that may help to promote fat loss: catechins,
caffeine, and theanine. Studies suggest that green tea compounds
may help promote fat loss by inhibiting both gastric and pancreatic
lipase, the enzymes that digest triglycerides, and synthetase, the
enzyme responsible for synthesizing fatty acids into the form in
which they can be stored in the body’s adipose (fat) cells. It is for
this reason—as well as the fact that green tea’s antioxidant concentration has been found to be health promoting on many levels—that
I emphasize its consumption in the Healthy Weight Loss Eating
Plan. (My Healthier Lifestyle Tea is composed of green tea and
lemon juice.)
I’d like to point out one further area of research involving optimal
metabolism and weight loss—that area is contamination of whole,
natural foods with pesticides and other toxic substances when these
foods are grown and processed in an unhealthy way. There’s some
preliminary evidence to suggest that chlorine-containing pesticides
and other compounds (collectively referred to as “organochlorines”)
can interrupt the process of thermogenesis and make weight loss
more difficult through this means. My emphasis on organically
grown foods lets you steer clear of these organochlorine contaminants! You won’t have to worry about them interrupting your
body’s metabolism if you stick as much as possible with organically grown whole foods. 


Chapter 7
7.1World’s Healthiest Foods Promote Digestive Health
 The World’s Healthiest Foods provide our digestive system with the
health-promoting nutrients it needs to function at its best. This is not
only important to overall health but to successful weight loss as well.
In order to achieve healthy weight loss, it is necessary to maintain
metabolic supplies of energy to our brain, muscles, and other organ
systems. This “metabolic maintenance” can only be achieved when
the digestive tract is working properly. Your digestive tract is the
place where everything starts.
The digestive process begins when you chew your food. It’s important
to adequately chew in order to break the food down into small
enough pieces to allow for the best digestion. I think that the more
you chew, the more weight you can lose. Unless you can break down
your food effectively, nutrients will not be made available for
absorption up into your body. And if you cannot absorb the nutrients,
they cannot provide benefits to the rest of your body. It’s absolutely
essential for you to digest food and absorb nutrients in an optimal
way if you want to achieve healthy weight loss.
As I will present in Chapter 10, inflammatory balance in the body
may be especially important to maintain during times of weight loss.
One way to maintain this balance is to make sure your digestive tract
is functioning optimally. That’s because if there is any compromise
in your digestion, unwanted molecules (like toxic residues or allergycausing substances) can sometimes get absorbed into the blood
stream and trigger unwanted inflammatory responses.While all nutrients are important to maintaining digestive health,
following are a few of the health-promoting nutrients found in the
World’s Healthiest Foods that have been singled out for their special
contribution.
Dietary Fiber
At the top of many lists for digestive tract support is dietary fiber.
Your food simply cannot pass through you in an optimal way unless
it contains fiber. Ideally, we should have at least 10 grams of fiber
with every meal and at least 5 grams with every snack, although 20
grams per meal and 10 grams per snack would also be helpful to
most of our digestive tracts. Whole, unprocessed foods are essential
for adequate fiber. Of special importance are World’s Healthiest
Foods such as vegetables, legumes (like beans or lentils) and whole
grains. The skins of fruit are also rich in fiber. Fiber helps keep food
moving through our intestines at a gradual pace—not too fast and
not too slow.
Glutamine
Although not as well known in the conventional world of nutrition,
glutamine is an amino acid that serves as one of the primary fuels
for cells that line our small intestine. It can be made from other
amino acids found in food or in our body, but it is also found
preformed in a variety of World’s Healthiest Foods, including cabbage,
beets, beef, chicken, fish, beans, and dairy products.
Short Chain Fatty Acids
Like glutamine, short chain fatty acids (or SCFAs) are not wellknown in the conventional world of nutrition, but these key nutrients
serve as preferred fuels for cells that line our large intestine. If these
cells do not have adequate energy, they cannot process our food
properly. SCFAs are formed by bacteria in our small intestine when
these bacteria process starches (especially resistant starches) and
several other types of carbohydrate-related molecules found in our
food. World’s Healthiest Foods such as whole grains like corn, oats,
wheat, rye, and brown rice; fruits such as apples and citrus fruits;and all legumes are good sources of resistant starch and non-starch
carbohydrates that our intestinal bacteria can convert into SCFAs. 

7.2Digestive-Health Nutrients
 The process of digestion and absorption is a complicated one that
involves dozens of different cell types, dozens of different enzymes,
the movement of smooth muscles around our intestines, and the
trigger of these muscles by our nerves. It’s literally impossible to
name a single vitamin or mineral that does not play a role either directly or indirectly in some aspect of digestive health. For this reason, foods with the greatest concentration of nutrients and greatest
variety of nutrients are optimal for digestive support. The World’s
Healthiest Foods fit this description exactly because they have all
been chosen on the basis of nutrient-richness. They provide our
digestive tract with all of necessary nutrients, while at the same
time avoiding putting pressure on the digestive tract to work unduly
hard.


Chapter 8
8.1World’s Healthiest Foods Promote Liver Health
 Dietary balance and nutrient-richness are the keys for supporting
your liver and the keys for supporting healthy weight loss as well.
Good balance and nutrient-richness work equally well for weight
loss and liver health because both processes depend on the same
dietary foundation of nourishment.
The World’s Healthiest Foods are important for delivering a concentrated and varied mixture of metabolic-support nutrients to your
liver. If you can choose the certified organic version of nutrient-rich
World’s Healthiest Foods you will also be able to avoid unnecessary
metabolic loads on your liver that can occur from toxic residues
found in non-organic foods (for more on organic foods, see page
199). Since the World’s Healthiest Foods are minimally processed
foods, they also support liver health by freeing your liver from the
task of processing additives. An approach to food that emphasizes
the above principles—relying on nutrient-rich World’s Healthiest
Foods as the foundation of your diet, and choosing organically
grown varieties when possible—can work wonders for your liver,
and in keeping your weight loss process a healthy one.
Why is the liver so important for healthy weight loss? From a metabolic standpoint, losing weight places an extra toll on our body. It’s
a metabolic challenge for our body to shift from weight maintenance
over into weight loss. Alongside of the digestive tract, our liver lies
at the very center of this process. Our liver is the place where things
get sorted out in terms of metabolism. The breakdown of fat into
energy and the transport of unwanted fat both require a healthy liver.
So does production of energy to fuel the brain during a time of metabolic stress. Healthy blood sugar balance, healthy wakefulness
and sleep, and healthy processing of vitamins and minerals all
depend on a healthy liver.
Will you feel healthy enough to stick with your weight loss? Will
you be able to sustain the process over many months because you
feel healthy and up to the task? The answers to those questions point
directly to your liver as the organ system that is focused on metabolic
challenges and optimal metabolism. So, as you can see, supporting
your liver is a very important aspect of encouraging healthy weight
loss and the World’s Healthiest Foods provide the nutrients that can
promote liver health.


Chapter 9
9.1World’s Healthiest Foods Balance Blood Sugar Levels 
 Keeping Blood Sugar Balanced
Glucose—a type of sugar found in our blood—is a necessary nutrient
for many cells, especially the brain. An essential feature of maintaining health is to have balanced blood glucose levels. If these levels
are too low, our cells may not be properly nourished. If these levels
are too high, metabolic consequences can occur which can lead to
damage to the kidneys, arteries, and other body systems. High blood
glucose levels also usually reflect that the cells are not being able to
take in the glucose and therefore are not getting the energy they need
for normal function.
When we speak about blood sugar, we are not talking about the
same type of sugar as you find as table sugar. Blood sugar is glucose,
a simple sugar that others can be broken down into.
At every moment of every day, our blood sugar level is shifting
slightly. Eating a meal can shift our blood sugar level dramatically—
depending, of course, on which foods we eat and how thoroughly we
are able to chew and digest them. It’s natural for our blood sugar to
increase after a meal. However, it’s unnatural for it to increase beyond certain limits. Similarly, between meals, it is natural for our
blood sugar to drop. But excessive drops are problematic.
If we eat in a way that turns our blood sugar balance into a rollercoaster ride, we risk several unwanted consequences, including the
possibility of unwanted weight gain. The connection between large
blood sugar swings and potential weight gain is fairly simple. If our blood sugar goes up too dramatically and then drops, we may
experience this drop-off as a need for more food to raise our blood
sugar back up again, often to its elevated level. Similarly, if we go
too long without eating and our blood sugar “bottoms out” at an
excessively low level, we may feel desperate for whatever we can get
our hands on. In either direction, the rollercoaster ride can spell
trouble for excess eating.
If we get caught up in large pendulum swings with our blood sugar,
we are more likely to want high-sugar, high-calorie, and nutrientpoor foods. That situation can only increase our risk of unwanted
weight gain.
Processed foods with high levels of simple sugar will spike our
blood sugar up more quickly than whole, natural foods. These
processed foods are often storehouses of refined carbohydrates,
almost never contain enough fiber to balance digestion and provide
for a very gradual breakdown and release of carbohydrates into our
digestive tract, and are usually deficient in the vitamins and minerals
needed to support insulin production and the uptake of glucose into
our cells. This can trigger a yo-yo effect in our blood sugar levels and
also increase our risk of unwanted weight gain.
Nutrient-rich World’s Healthiest Foods contain a wealth of vitamins,
minerals, fiber, and other health-promoting compounds that can help
us maintain optimal blood sugar regulation. They are rich in fiber,
which steadies the speed of digestion. They contain chromium and
vitamin B3, which are involved in the process of insulin metabolism
and the ability of this hormone to clear sugar from our bloodstream.
Many nutrient-rich World’s Healthiest Foods are also storehouses
of zinc, a mineral that plays an important role in blood sugar balance.
So, you can see how eating nutrient-rich World’s Healthiest Foods
can help to keep your blood sugar on par. Not only will this nutrient
contribution help with your ability to lose weight but it will also
provide you with great overall health benefits since excess blood sugar levels can lead to insulin resistance, a condition that we now
recognize as a critical factor in the development of many health
conditions.

9.2Insulin Resistance
 Health scientists have always looked at the process of developing a
chronic disease—like obesity, or diabetes, or high blood pressure—
as being a complicated one that involves many factors. One of the
most prominent factors in this mix is insulin resistance. In the year
2007 alone, over 900 research studies focused exclusively on insulin
resistance and its relationship to long-term health. Insulin resistance
has become so important in our understanding of health that it is no
longer possible to understand a simple process like chronic weight
gain without considering insulin resistance and its potential role in
the process.
How Insulin Resistance Becomes a Problem
The most common source of energy in our body is sugar (glucose.)
When our cells need energy, sugar is the fuel they depend on most
often. The sugar needed by our cells is constantly flowing through
our blood. However, the help of insulin—a protein hormone made
by our pancreas—is usually required in order for sugar to leave our
bloodstream and flow into our cells. Insulin resistance is a situation
in which this process breaks down and our cells stop responding
effectively to the insulin produced by our pancreas. Our pancreas
may make an unusually high amount of insulin in an effort to get
sugar into our cells. But insulin resistance prevents this effort from
being fully effective because the actions of insulin continue to be
resisted in some way. “Insulin resistance” is the name given to this
unwanted set of events. Insulin resistance can become more than just
temporary—it can become an everyday roadblock to health.
How Insulin Resistance Affects Weight Management
There is not one simple, easy-to-describe relationship between insulin
resistance and body weight. But there are several easy-to-describe
features. First, excess body weight in the form of excess fat—particularly around the middle (or abdomen)—is closely related to development
of insulin resistance. Particularly when a man has a waist circumference of more than 40 inches or a woman’s is 35 inches or more,
insulin resistance is significantly more likely to occur.
How does excess abdominal fat help to trigger insulin resistance?
Researchers are not entirely certain about this set of events. Traditionally, all of the research on insulin and blood sugar balance has
focused on muscle rather than fat. When insulin helps sugar leave the
bloodstream, it usually helps sugar enter a muscle cell—not a fat
cell.
Until recently, the role of fat cells in blood sugar balance has been
overlooked because the muscles have been viewed as so very important
in receiving sugar from the blood. Current research, however, has
made it clear that fat cells (called adipose tissue) also play a key role
in insulin metabolism and blood sugar regulation. One of these connections, as described in the chapter on inflammation, is related to
the fact that overly fatty fat cells start making insufficient amounts
of adiponectin, a protein that helps insulin to lock onto cells and
escort sugar out of our blood. When adiponectin is in short supply,
too much sugar can remain in the blood, causing our pancreas to
produce more insulin in an effort to compensate. But the true problem
cannot be solved by more insulin. The true problem is insulin resistance—in this case, being caused by too much abdominal body fat.
Insulin Resistance and the Tendency to Become Overweight
Just as too much abdominal fat can increase our tendency to develop
insulin resistance, insulin resistance can increase our tendency to
become overweight. Particularly in women who are lean and have
lower amounts of total body fat, insulin resistance increases the
chance of weight gain and obesity. Women who have gone through
menopause also have increased risk of weight gain following the
development of insulin resistance. In women who are already obese,
however, insulin resistance may actually protect against weight gain
and make weight loss easier. Finally, there is some fascinating research showing that individuals who develop insulin resistance—
and at the same time obtain a high percent of their total calories
from fat—have a greater chance of gaining weight and becoming
obese than individuals who have insulin resistance but obtain only
a moderate percent of total calories from fat.

9.3How the World’s Healthiest Foods Can Help Prevent Insulin Resistance and Unwanted Weight Gain
 There are three basic ways in which your diet can help prevent insulin
resistance. Fortunately, the World’s Healthiest Foods can help you
in each of these three basic ways.
First is the task of avoiding, or getting rid of, excess abdominal fat.
(If you are already overweight and already have increased fat around
the middle section, you will still want to avoid the addition of more
abdominal fat.) Since the risk of insulin resistance increases as the
amount of abdominal fat gets larger, this step seems like an important
one. So even if you’ve already got too much fat around the middle
section, or if your waistline is fine and you are simply trying to avoid
unwanted weight gain around your middle, you’ll want make the
World’s Healthiest Foods more of a priority in your diet since they
are the key to reduced risk of insulin resistance. Even though there is
no way to “spot reduce” and lose fat pounds exclusively from your
middle section, overall weight loss will include loss of fat from your
middle section, and you can accomplish this overall weight loss
most effectively with nutrient-rich World’s Healthiest Foods.
Second is the task of avoiding a high-fat diet. People who develop
insulin resistance—and at the same time obtain a high percent of
their total calories from fat—have a greater chance of gaining
weight than people who have insulin resistance but obtain only a
moderate percent of total calories from fat. As you’ll see, the menus
that I provide in the Healthy Weight Loss Eating Plan provide an
average of 249 total calories from fat. This is ideal for moderating fat
intake and keeping the risk of weight gain down from an insulin resistance standpoint.Third, and perhaps most important, is steadying your blood sugar
as much as possible by the way you eat. Here the World’s Healthiest
Foods can help you in a variety of ways. High-fiber foods are essential
for stabilizing your blood sugar because they help regulate the pace
of your digestion. And since most of the World’s Healthiest Foods
are plant-based foods they are naturally rich in fiber.
Also important for stabilizing blood sugar are protein-rich foods.
Protein digests at a moderate pace that is easy on blood sugar levels.
The lean meats, fish, low-fat dairy foods, legumes, and most of the
nuts and seeds included as World’s Healthiest Foods are considered
rich protein sources. Once again, the recipes included in the Healthy
Weight Loss Eating Plan frequently feature these protein-rich foods.
Finally, nothing is harder on our blood sugar levels than a diet filled
with highly processed foods in which the fiber, vitamins, and minerals
have been largely removed through processing. Since the Healthy
Weight Loss – Without Dieting emphasizes World’s Healthiest Foods
it keeps these processed foods out of your mainstream meal plan,
and in this way, it pays huge dividends in terms of blood sugar balance.

9.4Maintaining Balanced Blood Sugar Levels by Choosing Foods Based on the Glycemic Index
 It’s important to remember that not all foods, not even all of the
World’s Healthiest Foods, are created alike when it comes to their
effects on our blood sugar. Some foods can cause stark spikes while
others keep circulating blood sugar levels on a relatively even keel.
The Glycemic Index (GI) is a numerical scale used to indicate how
fast and how high a particular food can raise our blood glucose
(blood sugar) level. A food with a low GI will typically prompt a
moderate rise in blood glucose, while a food with a high GI may
cause our blood glucose level to increase above the optimal level.
Selecting foods based on their GI is a great way to control fluctuations
in your blood sugar levels An awareness of foods’ GI can help you control your blood sugar
levels, and by doing so, may help you to achieve or maintain a
healthy weight, let alone prevent heart disease, improve cholesterol
levels, and prevent insulin resistance, type 2 diabetes, and certain
cancers. A substantial amount of research suggests a low-GI diet
provides these significant health benefits and can be a helpful
component of a healthy weight loss approach.
The following chart details the GI of the World’s Healthiest Foods.
Next to each food you will find a classification, which are based
upon the Canadian Diabetes Association’s ranking of GI and their
threshold points. Therefore, in this chart, very low is associated with
foods that have a GI of 20 or less, low with a GI of 55 or less,
medium with a GI of 56-69, and high with a GI of 70 or greater. 


Chapter 10
10.1World’s Healthiest Foods Reduce Inflammation
 We hear a lot about inflammation these days and how it contributes
to health conditions such as cardiovascular disease and arthritis.
Before I discuss the link between inflammation and weight management,
I wanted to first explain what inflammation is.
Inflammation is actually a natural biological response that occurs in
the body. Inflammation, in general, is not bad and we don’t want to
stop the entirety of inflammatory mechanisms in our body if we want
to promote good health. What we want to do is control inflammation
and not have excess inflammation occurring in our body. It is
imbalanced inflammation that can propagate health conditions and
related symptoms as well as that which plays a role in weight
management.

10.2Reducing Fat Storage Cells and Controlling Inflammation
 The study of fat cells and their role in health has produced some
great surprises in the past 10 years, including the knowledge that fat
cells are anything but inactive storage spots for fat. We are used to
thinking of our body fat as “just sitting there,” placing extra weight on our bones, and stressing our heart and joints from the sheer extra
poundage.
What we have learned in the past 10 years is that fat cells are
metabolically active, and when too much fat is stored up inside
them, they go to work sending off messages that act to increase
inflammation and inflammatory problems. Some of the messaging
molecules that signal inflammation are only produced in overly fatty
fat cells! Conversely, fat cells are also capable of producing anti-inflammatory molecules, and production of these molecules can be
reduced when the fat cells become overloaded with fat.
You may already have heard about a weight loss program called The
Fat Resistance Diet by Dr. Leo Galland (Broadway Books, 2005) or
a second weight loss approach called UltraMetabolism: The Simple
Plan for Automatic Weight Loss by Dr. Mark Hyman (Scribner,
2006). Both of these programs recognize several newly found
connections between weight management, our brains, our fat cells,
and inflammation. There are a good number of important and cuttingedge facts that you are going to want to consider in your healthy
weight loss planning when it comes to inflammation. For this
reason, I am going to tell you about this inflammation story in a more
detailed way.

10.3Understanding Fat Cells and Leptin
 Leptin is a particularly important molecule that our fat cells produce.
When we have too little fat stored up inside our fat cells, our fat
cells cut way back on their production of leptin.
The reverse set of events holds true when we overeat and our fat
stores become too great. Under those conditions, our fat cells start
to produce more and more leptin. The increased production of
leptin in turn will trigger two sets of events: it will decrease our
appetite and it will increase our body’s ability to burn fat.
At this point in the story, we have come to the role of inflammation It turns out that most people who have too much fat stored up in
their fat cells also have plenty of leptin. Their fat cells seem to do a
good job when it comes to increasing production of leptin when this
molecule is needed to help lower appetite and increase fat burning.
However, despite having this plentiful supply of leptin, the leptin
does not seem to do its job effectively. The appetite reduction and
increased fat burn do not seem to take place, even though there is
more leptin being produced. This clearly problematic situation is
called leptin resistance. Our bodies seem to resist the effects of leptin,
even though they would definitely benefit if leptin could do its job.
Research studies make it clear that inflammation is one factor that
can contribute to leptin resistance. In fact, it may be the major factor
involved with leptin resistance for many individuals. Although it is
not yet clear exactly how the two are connected, individuals with
chronic, low-grade inflammation are at greater risk for leptin
resistance. Anyone living or eating in a way that increases their risk
of chronic, unwanted inflammation is also increasing their risk of
appetite problems and fat-burning problems due to this problem of
leptin resistance. This set of facts is one clear reason to why a
Healthiest Way of Eating includes a significant amount of foods that
have anti-inflammatory properties.

10.4Adiponectin Can Also Impact Weight Loss
 Like leptin, adiponectin is a regulatory molecule produced by our fat
cells. Unlike leptin, however, adiponectin will be produced in lower
supplies (not greater supplies) by our fat cells when we overeat and
start storing up too much unwanted body fat. Adiponectin acts somewhat like a “fat protector,” making sure that enough fat will be
around in times of short energy supplies. However, excessive and
continual overeating that results in chronic deficiency of adiponectin
is harmful, not helpful, to our health.
Adiponectin is one of the anti-inflammatory fat-cell-produced
molecules that suffers when fat cells become overly loaded with fat.And when the production of adiponectin drops, the body’s ability to
balance blood sugar also drops. The reason is simple. Adiponectin
produced by fat cells is a protein that helps insulin bind onto cells
and encourages the flow of sugar out of the bloodstream and into
the cells. When fat cells stop producing enough adiponectin, too
much sugar stays in the blood.

10.5Food Choices Can Help Prevent Inflammation
 Always keep in mind that what you eat can help with inflammation
in three different ways. These three aspects are taken into consideration
in the Healthy Weight Loss Eating Plan, which will show you examples
of how to construct a nutrient-rich way of eating that helps to keep
inflammation in check.
First, what you eat can be adjusted to avoid deficiency of antiinflammatory nutrients. An inadequate supply of omega-3 fatty
acids, for example, can increase the risk of chronic inflammation.
By adjusting the diet to include more omega-3s, the risk of chronic
inflammation can be lowered.
Second, what you eat can be adjusted to avoid triggering too much
inflammation. Since toxins found in food can serve as inflammatory
triggers, you can lower your risk of unwanted and chronic inflammation
by eliminating these toxins from your meal plan as much as possible
Finally, a diet can be adjusted to avoid imbalances that trigger chronic
inflammation. A diet that contains too many processed foods, for
example, will provide too many calories in the form of simple sugars
and too few calories from nutrient-rich foods. By shifting the balance
in this area, unwanted inflammation can become less likely. Let’s
look at some basic dos and don’ts in each of these three areas.

10.6Getting Plenty of Anti-Inflammatory Nutrients
 At the top of the list for anti-inflammatory nutrients are two broad
groups of phytonutrients called flavonoids and carotenoids. Many
flavonoids and carotenoids have strong anti-inflammatory properties,
which are often unique to the specific food involved. Richly colored
vegetables and fruits are some of your best bets here, including dark
green leafy vegetables, beets, and berries. Pineapple also contains a
proteolytic (protein-digesting) enzyme called bromelain that has
been shown to have anti-inflammatory activity. These foods are
included among the World’s Healthiest Foods.
Some research studies have found that some individuals with high
intake of flavonoids and carotenoids do not show reduced tendency
to chronic inflammation. These studies make it clear that there are
no “magic bullets” when it comes to dietary prevention of chronic
disease. While it’s important to ensure that you are getting adequate
supplies of carotenoids and flavonoids, this shouldn’t be at the
expense of other nutrients, since all are important. Yet, luckily
since carotenoid- and flavonoid-containing foods are also generally
rich in so many other vitamins and minerals, they can make great
overall contributions to your nutrient goals.
Foods rich in omega-3 fatty acids can also be considered anti-inflammatory because omega-3 fatty acids like alpha-linolenic acid (ALA),
eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) can
be converted into regulatory molecules that put the brakes on inflammation. Foods rich in omega-3 fatty acids include: fish such as
salmon, sardines, tuna, and other cold-water fish; and, nuts and
seeds, especially flaxseeds, hemp seeds, and walnuts. Other foods
that contain omega-3s in lesser, but still very helpful, amounts include
soybeans, winter squash, and purslane.
Extra virgin olive oil is another food that has been shown to have
anti-inflammatory benefits. Some of these benefits come from oleuropein and hydroxytyrosol, two unique polyphenols found in olives.
It is important to note that these two phytonutrients are more concentrated in extra virgin olive than in other types of olive oil. As
you’ll see in the Healthy Weight Loss Eating Plan, I place a strong
emphasis on extra virgin olive oil because it has such great health
benefits.


Chapter 11
11.1What is the Healthy Weight Loss Eating Plan?
 The Healthy Weight Loss Eating Plan was developed to provide you
with a meals composed of nutrient-rich foods that are delicious to
your taste buds, satisfying in terms of amount, and make weight loss
an attainable goal. The 4 week's worth of menus in the Plan were developed to give you a basic blueprint—a practical guideline for
weight loss. What I hope is that you will be able to use the 4-week
blueprint as a guideline for developing your own personalized strategy for continued healthy weight loss.

11.2Who can benefit from implementation of the Plan
 The Plan was developed to improve the health of the average individual who is overweight and wants to become healthier in a way
that includes healthy weight loss. The Plan is not a clinical plan, and
it is not designed to address clinical problems. You'll need to solicit
the help of your healthcare provider if you face any clinical issues
in your healthcare, including any issues that might impact your
choice of a weight loss plan. In general, since our weight loss plan
averages about 1,530 calories per day, we would expect it to provide the most weight loss benefit for individuals who are currently
consuming a substantially higher level of calories.

11.3What to expect when following the Plan
 In the U.S., adults consume an average of approximately 2,100 calories of food per day. On average, U.S. adults are also overweight,
and their intake of dietary calories is related to their overweight status. Since our weight loss plan averages about 1,530 calories per
day, it represents a decrease of about 570 calories per day for the average U.S. adult. Over one week's period of time—and all other factors being equal—that 570-per-day calorie decrease would be
expected to result in a weight loss of about 1 pound. In one month,
the expected weight loss would be 4 pounds, and in one year, 48
pounds.
Regardless of the weight loss plan you follow, your daily calorie intake must be matched up correctly with your activity level. If you
consume exactly the number of daily calories needed to complete
your daily activities (including exercise), you can expect to maintain
your current weight. If you exceed that number, you can expect to
gain weight. If you consume fewer calories than are needed to complete your daily activities (including exercise), you can expect to
lose weight. Of course, in practice, weight loss never occurs with
this degree of mathematical exactness!The amount of calories that a person expends by doing an exercise
depends upon personal factors such as their body weight. There are
numerous calorie expenditure calculators available on the Internet,
which you can use to figure out how much you will burn by participating in different forms of exercise and activities.
Remember, before you embark on any exercise program, you’ll want
to check in with your physician who should be familiar enough with
your health to give you personalized guidelines and any important
do’s/don’ts.
When following the Plan, you should expect to start developing a
sense of foods, food groups, food selection, recipes, and menu planning that can serve as a springboard for development of your own
ongoing weight loss approach that takes advantage of nutrient-rich,
whole natural foods and that fits with your individual health status
and lifestyle. You can also expect to get a sense of what a healthy,
1,530 calorie feels like, and how it fits in with your other lifestyle
goals. On a 1,530-calorie diet, many individuals will not be able to
see weekly changes in their weight status unless daily exercise is incorporated into their weight loss plan.

11.4How to Start the Plan
 Welcome to the Healthy Weight Loss Eating Plan—a 28-day guide
to help you lose weight. I believe that everyone can lead a healthy
life and be slim, and that eating healthier affects how you feel, how
much energy you have, and how healthy you are. I have created a
complete Plan to help you lose weight, gain more control of your
health, supercharge your immune system, and help rejuvenate your
entire body. In this Plan you will discover some of the most nutritious foods around—The World's Healthiest Foods.
While you will likely feel the benefits during the first few days,
know that it takes about 4 weeks for a habit to settle in. So give yourself this time and be patient with yourself as you embark on this
Healthiest Way of Eating journey.
The Plan is not a diet nor an expensive, time-consuming program.
It is a way to begin a lifestyle change to the Healthiest Way of Eating.
And I’ve done all the work for you so it’s easy! I provide you with
recipes that not only taste great but take only minutes to prepare—
most take 7 minutes or less and you can make an entire meal in just
15 minutes! You just have to do the shopping and you don't have to
break the bank to buy the foods called for in these recipes. 

11.5The Benefits of the Healthy Weight Loss Eating Plan 
 The Plan consists of 28 days’ worth of daily menus that embrace
the Healthiest Way of Eating. Since each of the breakfasts, lunches,
dinners, and snacks for the week have a similar level of calories and
nutrients, the Plan features a flexible approach that allows you to
swap meals from one day to the next, if you would like. This will
allow you to make the Plan work for your individual needs